[PAGE 1]
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE
Clinical Practice Guideline for the
Diagnosis, Evaluation, and Treatment of
Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity
Disorder in Children and Adolescents
Mark L. Wolraich, MD, FAAP,a Joseph F. Hagan, Jr, MD, FAAP,b,c Carla Allan, PhD,d,e Eugenia Chan, MD, MPH, FAAP,f,g
Dale Davison, MSpEd, PCC,h,i Marian Earls, MD, MTS, FAAP,j,k Steven W. Evans, PhD,l,m Susan K. Flinn, MA,n
Tanya Froehlich, MD, MS, FAAP,o,p Jennifer Frost, MD, FAAFP,q,r Joseph R. Holbrook, PhD, MPH,s
Christoph Ulrich Lehmann, MD, FAAP,t Herschel Robert Lessin, MD, FAAP,u Kymika Okechukwu, MPA,v
Karen L. Pierce, MD, DFAACAP,w,x Jonathan D. Winner, MD, FAAP,y William Zurhellen, MD, FAAP,z SUBCOMMITTEE ON CHILDREN AND
ADOLESCENTS WITH ATTENTION-DEFICIT/HYPERACTIVE DISORDER
abstract
Attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is one of the most common
neurobehavioral disorders of childhood and can profoundly affect children’s
academic achievement, well-being, and social interactions. The American Academy
of Pediatrics ﬁrst published clinical recommendations for evaluation and
diagnosis of pediatric ADHD in 2000; recommendations for treatment followed
in 2001. The guidelines were revised in 2011 and published with an accompanying
process of care algorithm (PoCA) providing discrete and manageable steps by
which clinicians could fulﬁll the clinical guideline’s recommendations. Since the
release of the 2011 guideline, the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders has been revised to the ﬁfth edition, and new ADHD-related research
has been published. These publications do not support dramatic changes to
the previous recommendations. Therefore, only incremental updates have been
made in this guideline revision, including the addition of a key action statement
related to diagnosis and treatment of comorbid conditions in children and
adolescents with ADHD. The accompanying process of care algorithm has also
been updated to assist in implementing the guideline recommendations.
Throughout the process of revising the guideline and algorithm, numerous
systemic barriers were identiﬁed that restrict and/or hamper pediatric clinicians’
ability to adopt their recommendations. Therefore, the subcommittee created
a companion article (available in the Supplemental Information) on systemic
barriers to the care of children and adolescents with ADHD, which identiﬁes the
major systemic-level barriers and presents recommendations to address those
barriers; in this article, we support the recommendations of the clinical practice
guideline and accompanying process of care algorithm.
aSection of Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics, University of
Oklahoma, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; bDepartment of Pediatrics, The
Robert Larner, MD, College of Medicine, The University of Vermont,
Burlington, Vermont; cHagan, Rinehart, and Connolly Pediatricians,
PLLC, Burlington, Vermont; dDivision of Developmental and Behavioral
Health, Department of Pediatrics, Children’s Mercy Kansas City, Kansas
City, Missouri; eSchool of Medicine, University of Missouri-Kansas City,
Kansas City, Missouri; fDivision of Developmental Medicine, Boston
Children’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; gHarvard Medical School,
Harvard University, Boston, Massachusetts; hChildren and Adults with
Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder, Lanham, Maryland; iDale
Davison, LLC, Skokie, Illinois; jCommunity Care of North Carolina,
Raleigh, North Carolina; kSchool of Medicine, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina; lDepartment of Psychology, Ohio
University, Athens, Ohio; mCenter for Intervention Research in Schools,
Ohio University, Athens, Ohio; nAmerican Academy of Pediatrics,
Alexandria, Virginia; oDepartment of Pediatrics, University of
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio; pCincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, Ohio; qSwope Health Services, Kansas City, Kansas;
rAmerican Academy of Family Physicians, Leawood, Kansas; sNational
Center on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia; tDepartments of
Biomedical Informatics and Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University, Nashville,
Tennessee; uThe Children’s Medical Group, Poughkeepsie, New York;
To cite: Wolraich ML, Hagan JF, Allan C, et al. AAP
SUBCOMMITTEE ON CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS WITH
ATTENTION-DEFICIT/HYPERACTIVE DISORDER. Clinical Practice
Guideline for the Diagnosis, Evaluation, and Treatment of
Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children and
Adolescents. Pediatrics. 2019;144(4):e20192528
PEDIATRICS Volume 144, number 4, October 2019:e20192528
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from publications.​aap.​org/​pediatrics/​article-pdf/​144/​4/​e20192528/​1443490/​peds_20192528.​pdf
by guest
[/PAGE 1]

[PAGE 2]
INTRODUCTION
This article updates and replaces the
2011 clinical practice guideline
revision published by the American
Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), “Clinical
Practice Guideline: Diagnosis and
Evaluation of the Child with
Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity
Disorder.”1 This guideline, like the
previous document, addresses the
evaluation, diagnosis, and treatment
of attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD) in children from age
4 years to their 18th birthday, with
special guidance provided for ADHD
care for preschool-aged children and
adolescents. (Note that for the
purposes of this document,
“preschool-aged” refers to children
from age 4 years to the sixth
birthday.) Pediatricians and other
primary care clinicians (PCCs) may
continue to provide care after
18 years of age, but care beyond this
age was not studied for this guideline.
Since 2011, much research has
occurred, and the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,
Fifth Edition (DSM-5), has been
released. The new research and DSM-
5 do not, however, support dramatic
changes to the previous
recommendations. Hence, this new
guideline includes only incremental
updates to the previous guideline.
One such update is the addition of
a key action statement (KAS) about
the diagnosis and treatment of
coexisting or comorbid conditions in
children and adolescents with ADHD.
The subcommittee uses the term
“comorbid,” to be consistent with the
DSM-5.
Since 2011, the release of new
research reﬂects an increased
understanding and recognition of
ADHD’s prevalence and
epidemiology; the challenges it raises
for children and families; the need for
a comprehensive clinical resource for
the evaluation, diagnosis, and
treatment of pediatric ADHD; and the
barriers that impede the
implementation of such a resource. In
response, this guideline is supported
by 2 accompanying documents,
available in the Supplemental
Information: (1) a process of care
algorithm (PoCA) for the diagnosis
and treatment of children and
adolescents with ADHD and (2) an
article on systemic barriers to the
care of children and adolescents with
ADHD. These supplemental
documents are designed to aid PCCs
in implementing the formal
recommendations for the evaluation,
diagnosis, and treatment of children
and adolescents with ADHD. Although
this document is speciﬁc to children
and adolescents in the United States
in some of its recommendations,
international stakeholders can modify
speciﬁc content (ie, educational laws
about accommodations, etc) as
needed. (Prevention is addressed in
the Mental Health Task Force
recommendations.2)
PoCA for the Diagnosis and
Treatment of Children and
Adolescents With ADHD
In this revised guideline and
accompanying PoCA, we recognize
that evaluation, diagnosis, and
treatment are a continuous process.
The PoCA provides recommendations
for implementing the guideline steps,
although there is less evidence for the
PoCA than for the guidelines. The
section on evaluating and treating
comorbidities has also been expanded
in the PoCA document.
Systems Barriers to the Care of
Children and Adolescents With ADHD
There are many system-level barriers
that hamper the adoption of the best-
practice recommendations contained
in the clinical practice guideline and
the PoCA. The procedures
recommended in this guideline
necessitate spending more time with
patients and their families,
developing a care management
system of contacts with school and
other community stakeholders, and
providing continuous, coordinated
care to the patient and his or her
family. There is some evidence that
African American and Latino children
are less likely to have ADHD
diagnosed and are less likely to be
treated for ADHD. Special attention
should be given to these populations
when assessing comorbidities as they
relate to ADHD and when treating for
ADHD symptoms.3 Given the
nationwide problem of limited access
to mental health clinicians,4
pediatricians and other PCCs are
increasingly called on to provide
services to patients with ADHD and to
their families. In addition, the AAP
holds that primary care pediatricians
should be prepared to diagnose and
manage mild-to-moderate ADHD,
anxiety, depression, and problematic
substance use, as well as co-manage
patients who have more severe
conditions with mental health
professionals. Unfortunately, third-
party payers seldom pay
appropriately for these time-
consuming services.5,6
To assist pediatricians and other
PCCs in overcoming such obstacles,
the companion article on systemic
barriers to the care of children and
adolescents with ADHD reviews the
barriers and makes recommendations
to address them to enhance care for
children and adolescents with ADHD.
ADHD EPIDEMIOLOGY AND SCOPE
Prevalence estimates of ADHD vary
on the basis of differences in research
methodologies, the various age
groups being described, and changes
in diagnostic criteria over time.7
Authors of a recent meta-analysis
calculated a pooled worldwide ADHD
prevalence of 7.2% among children8;
estimates from some community-
based samples are somewhat higher,
at 8.7% to 15.5%.9,10 National survey
data from 2016 indicate that 9.4% of
children in the United States 2 to
17 years of age have ever had an
ADHD diagnosis, including 2.4% of
children 2 to 5 years of age.11 In that
2
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from publications.​aap.​org/​pediatrics/​article-pdf/​144/​4/​e20192528/​1443490/​peds_20192528.​pdf
by guest
[/PAGE 2]

[PAGE 3]
national survey, 8.4% of children 2 to
17 years of age currently had ADHD,
representing 5.4 million children.11
Among children and adolescents with
current ADHD, almost two-thirds
were taking medication, and
approximately half had received
behavioral treatment of ADHD in the
past year. Nearly one quarter had
received neither type of treatment of
ADHD.11
Symptoms of ADHD occur in
childhood, and most children with
ADHD will continue to have
symptoms and impairment through
adolescence and into adulthood.
According to a 2014 national survey,
the median age of diagnosis was
7 years; approximately one-third of
children were diagnosed before
6 years of age.12 More than half of
these children were ﬁrst diagnosed
by a PCC, often a pediatrician.12 As
individuals with ADHD enter
adolescence, their overt hyperactive
and impulsive symptoms tend to
decline, whereas their inattentive
symptoms tend to persist.13,14
Learning and language problems are
common comorbid conditions with
ADHD.15
Boys are more than twice as likely as
girls to receive a diagnosis of
ADHD,9,11,16 possibly because
hyperactive behaviors, which are
easily observable and potentially
disruptive, are seen more frequently
in boys. The majority of both boys
and girls with ADHD also meet
diagnostic criteria for another mental
disorder.17,18 Boys are more likely to
exhibit externalizing conditions like
oppositional deﬁant disorder or
conduct disorder.17,19,20 Recent
research has established that girls
with ADHD are more likely than boys
to have a comorbid internalizing
condition like anxiety or
depression.21
Although there is a greater risk of
receiving a diagnosis of ADHD for
children who are the youngest in
their class (who are therefore less
developmentally capable of
compensating for their weaknesses),
for most children, retention is not
beneﬁcial.22
METHODOLOGY
As with the original 2000 clinical
practice guideline and the 2011
revision, the AAP collaborated with
several organizations to form
a subcommittee on ADHD (the
subcommittee) under the oversight of
the AAP Council on Quality
Improvement and Patient Safety.
The subcommittee’s membership
included representation of a wide
range of primary care and
subspecialty groups, including
primary care pediatricians,
developmental-behavioral
pediatricians, an epidemiologist from
the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention; and representatives from
the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, the Society for
Pediatric Psychology, the National
Association of School Psychologists,
the Society for Developmental and
Behavioral Pediatrics (SDBP), the
American Academy of Family
Physicians, and Children and Adults
with Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity
Disorder (CHADD) to provide
feedback on the patient/parent
perspective.
This subcommittee met over a 3.5-
year period from 2015 to 2018 to
review practice changes and newly
identiﬁed issues that have arisen
since the publication of the 2011
guidelines. The subcommittee
members’ potential conﬂicts were
identiﬁed and taken into
consideration in the group’s
deliberations. No conﬂicts prevented
subcommittee member participation
on the guidelines.
Research Questions
The subcommittee developed a series
of research questions to direct an
evidence-based review sponsored by
1 of the Evidence-based Practice
Centers of the US Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality
(AHRQ).23 These questions assessed
4 diagnostic areas and 3 treatment
areas on the basis of research
published in 2011 through 2016.
The AHRQ’s framework was guided
by key clinical questions addressing
diagnosis as well as treatment
interventions for children and
adolescents 4 to 18 years of age.
The ﬁrst clinical questions pertaining
to ADHD diagnosis were as follows:
1. What is the comparative
diagnostic accuracy of approaches
that can be used in the primary
care practice setting or by
specialists to diagnose ADHD
among children younger than
7 years of age?
2. What is the comparative
diagnostic accuracy of EEG,
imaging, or executive function
approaches that can be used in the
primary care practice setting or by
specialists to diagnose ADHD
among individuals aged 7 to their
18th birthday?
3. What are the adverse effects
associated with being labeled
correctly or incorrectly as having
ADHD?
4. Are there more formal
neuropsychological, imaging, or
genetic tests that improve the
diagnostic process?
The treatment questions were as
follows:
1. What are the comparative safety
and effectiveness of pharmacologic
and/or nonpharmacologic
treatments of ADHD in improving
outcomes associated with ADHD?
2. What is the risk of diversion of
pharmacologic treatment?
3. What are the comparative safety
and effectiveness of different
monitoring strategies to evaluate
the effectiveness of treatment or
changes in ADHD status (eg,
worsening or resolving
symptoms)?
PEDIATRICS Volume 144, number 4, October 2019
3
Downloaded from publications.​aap.​org/​pediatrics/​article-pdf/​144/​4/​e20192528/​1443490/​peds_20192528.​pdf
by guest
[/PAGE 3]

[PAGE 4]
In addition to this review of the
research questions, the subcommittee
considered information from a review
of evidence-based psychosocial
treatments for children and
adolescents with ADHD24 (which, in
some cases, affected the evidence
grade) as well as updated information
on prevalence from the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention.
Evidence Review
This article followed the latest
version of the evidence base update
format used to develop the previous 3
clinical practice guidelines.24–26
Under this format, studies were only
included in the review when they met
a variety of criteria designed to
ensure the research was based on
a strong methodology that yielded
conﬁdence in its conclusions.
The level of efﬁcacy for each
treatment was deﬁned on the basis of
child-focused outcomes related to
both symptoms and impairment.
Hence, improvements in behaviors on
the part of parents or teachers, such
as the use of communication or
praise, were not considered in the
review. Although these outcomes are
important, they address how
treatment reaches the child or
adolescent with ADHD and are,
therefore, secondary to changes in the
child’s behavior. Focusing on
improvements in the child or
adolescent’s symptoms and
impairment emphasizes the
disorder’s characteristics and
manifestations that affect children
and their families.
The treatment-related evidence relied
on a recent review of literature from
2011 through 2016 by the AHRQ of
citations from Medline, Embase,
PsycINFO, and the Cochrane Database
of Systematic Reviews.
The original methodology and report,
including the evidence search and
review, are available in their entirety
and as an executive summary at
https://effectivehealthcare.ahrq.gov/
sites/default/ﬁles/pdf/cer-203-adhd-
ﬁnal_0.pdf.
The evidence is discussed in more
detail in published reports and
articles.25
Guideline Recommendations and Key
Action Statements
The AAP policy statement,
“Classifying Recommendations for
Clinical Practice Guidelines,” was
followed in designating aggregate
evidence quality levels for the
available evidence (see Fig 1).27 The
AAP policy statement is consistent
with the grading recommendations
advanced by the University of
Oxford Centre for Evidence Based
Medicine.
The subcommittee reached consensus
on the evidence, which was then used
to develop the clinical practice
guideline’s KASs.
When the scientiﬁc evidence was at
least “good” in quality and
demonstrated a preponderance of
beneﬁts over harms, the KAS provides
a “strong recommendation” or
“recommendation.”27 Clinicians
should follow a “strong
recommendation” unless a clear and
compelling rationale for an
alternative approach is present;
clinicians are prudent to follow
a “recommendation” but are advised
to remain alert to new information
and be sensitive to patient
preferences27 (see Fig 1).
When the scientiﬁc evidence
comprised lower-quality or limited
data and expert consensus or high-
quality evidence with a balance
between beneﬁts and harms, the KAS
provides an “option” level of
recommendation. Options are clinical
interventions that a reasonable
health care provider might or might
not wish to implement in the
practice.27 Where the evidence
was lacking, a combination of
evidence and expert consensus
FIGURE 1
AAP rating of evidence and recommendations.
4
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from publications.​aap.​org/​pediatrics/​article-pdf/​144/​4/​e20192528/​1443490/​peds_20192528.​pdf
by guest
[/PAGE 4]

[PAGE 5]
would be used, although this
did not occur in these
guidelines, and all KASs
achieved a “strong
recommendation” level except
for KAS 7, on comorbidities,
which received a recommendation
level (see Fig 1).
As shown in Fig 1, integrating
evidence quality appraisal with an
assessment of the anticipated balance
between beneﬁts and harms leads to
a designation of a strong
recommendation, recommendation,
option, or no recommendation.
Once the evidence level was
determined, an evidence grade was
assigned. AAP policy stipulates that
the evidence supporting each KAS be
prospectively identiﬁed, appraised,
and summarized, and an explicit link
between quality levels and the grade
of recommendation must be deﬁned.
Possible grades of recommendations
range from “A” to “D,” with “A” being
the highest:
• grade A: consistent level A studies;
• grade B: consistent level B or
extrapolations from level A studies;
• grade C: level C studies or
extrapolations from level B or level
C studies;
• grade D: level D evidence or
troublingly inconsistent or
inconclusive studies of any level;
and
• level X: not an explicit level of
evidence as outlined by the Centre
for Evidence-Based Medicine. This
level is reserved for interventions
that are unethical or impossible to
test in a controlled or scientiﬁc
fashion and for which the
preponderance of beneﬁt or harm
is overwhelming, precluding
rigorous investigation.
Guided by the evidence quality and
grade, the subcommittee developed 7
KASs for the evaluation, diagnosis,
and treatment of ADHD in children
and adolescents (see Table 1).
These KASs provide for consistent
and high-quality care for children and
adolescents who may have symptoms
suggesting attention disorders or
problems as well as for their families.
In developing the 7 KASs, the
subcommittee considered the
requirements for establishing the
diagnosis; the prevalence of ADHD;
the effect of untreated ADHD; the
efﬁcacy and adverse effects of
treatment; various long-term
outcomes; the importance of
coordination between pediatric and
mental health service providers; the
value of the medical home; and the
common occurrence of comorbid
conditions, the importance of
addressing them, and the effects of
not treating them.
The subcommittee members with the
most epidemiological experience
assessed the strength of each
recommendation and the quality of
evidence supporting each draft KAS.
Peer Review
The guidelines and PoCA underwent
extensive peer review by more than
30 internal stakeholders (eg, AAP
committees, sections, councils, and
task forces) and external stakeholder
groups identiﬁed by the
subcommittee. The resulting
comments were compiled and
reviewed by the chair and vice chair;
relevant changes were incorporated
into the draft, which was then
reviewed by the full subcommittee.
KASS FOR THE EVALUATION,
DIAGNOSIS, TREATMENT, AND
MONITORING OF CHILDREN AND
ADOLESCENTS WITH ADHD
KAS 1
The pediatrician or other PCC should
initiate an evaluation for ADHD for
any child or adolescent age 4 years to
the 18th birthday who presents with
academic or behavioral problems and
symptoms of inattention,
hyperactivity, or impulsivity
(Table 2). (Grade B: strong
recommendation.)
The basis for this recommendation is
essentially unchanged from the
previous guideline. As noted, ADHD is
the most common neurobehavioral
disorder of childhood, occurring in
approximately 7% to 8% of children
and youth.8,18,28,29 Hence, the number
of children with this condition is far
greater than can be managed by the
mental health system.4 There is
evidence that appropriate diagnosis
can be accomplished in the primary
care setting for children and
adolescents.30,31 Note that there is
insufﬁcient evidence to recommend
diagnosis or treatment for children
younger than 4 years (other than
parent training in behavior
management [PTBM], which does not
require a diagnosis to be applied); in
instances in which ADHD-like
symptoms in children younger than
4 years bring substantial impairment,
PCCs can consider making a referral
for PTBM.
KAS 2
To make a diagnosis of ADHD, the
PCC should determine that DSM-5
criteria have been met, including
documentation of symptoms and
impairment in more than 1 major
setting (ie, social, academic, or
occupational), with information
obtained primarily from reports from
parents or guardians, teachers, other
school personnel, and mental health
clinicians who are involved in the
child or adolescent’s care. The PCC
should also rule out any alternative
cause (Table 3). (Grade B: strong
recommendation.)
The American Psychiatric Association
developed the DSM-5 using expert
consensus and an expanding research
foundation.32 The DSM-5 system is
used by professionals in psychiatry,
psychology, health care systems, and
primary care; it is also well
established with third-party payers.
PEDIATRICS Volume 144, number 4, October 2019
5
Downloaded from publications.​aap.​org/​pediatrics/​article-pdf/​144/​4/​e20192528/​1443490/​peds_20192528.​pdf
by guest
[/PAGE 5]

[PAGE 6]
The DSM-5 criteria deﬁne 4
dimensions of ADHD:
1. attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity
disorder primarily of the
inattentive presentation (ADHD/I)
(314.00 [F90.0]);
2. attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity
disorder primarily of the
hyperactive-impulsive
presentation (ADHD/HI) (314.01
[F90.1]);
3. attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity
disorder combined presentation
(ADHD/C) (314.01 [F90.2]); and
4. ADHD other speciﬁed and
unspeciﬁed ADHD (314.01
[F90.8]).
As with the previous guideline
recommendations, the DSM-5
classiﬁcation criteria are based on
the best available evidence for
ADHD diagnosis and are the
standard most frequently used by
clinicians and researchers to render
the diagnosis and document its
appropriateness for a given child.
The use of neuropsychological
testing has not been found to
improve diagnostic accuracy in
most cases, although it may have
beneﬁt in clarifying the child
or adolescent’s learning
strengths and weaknesses. (See the
TABLE 1 Summary of KASs for Diagnosing, Evaluating, and Treating ADHD in Children and Adolescents
KASs
Evidence Quality, Strength of Recommendation
KAS 1: The pediatrician or other PCC should initiate an evaluation for ADHD for any child or
adolescent age 4 years to the 18th birthday who presents with academic or behavioral
problems and symptoms of inattention, hyperactivity, or impulsivity.
Grade B, strong recommendation
KAS 2: To make a diagnosis of ADHD, the PCC should determine that DSM-5 criteria have been
met, including documentation of symptoms and impairment in more than 1 major setting
(ie, social, academic, or occupational), with information obtained primarily from reports
from parents or guardians, teachers, other school personnel, and mental health
clinicians who are involved in the child or adolescent’s care. The PCC should also rule out
any alternative cause.
Grade B, strong recommendation
KAS 3: In the evaluation of a child or adolescent for ADHD, the PCC should include a process
to at least screen for comorbid conditions, including emotional or behavioral conditions
(eg, anxiety, depression, oppositional deﬁant disorder, conduct disorders, substance use),
developmental conditions (eg, learning and language disorders, autism spectrum
disorders), and physical conditions (eg, tics, sleep apnea).
Grade B, strong recommendation
KAS 4: ADHD is a chronic condition; therefore, the PCC should manage children and
adolescents with ADHD in the same manner that they would children and youth with
special health care needs, following the principles of the chronic care model and the
medical home.
Grade B, strong recommendation
KAS 5a: For preschool-aged children (age 4 years to the sixth birthday) with ADHD, the PCC
should prescribe evidence-based PTBM and/or behavioral classroom interventions as the
ﬁrst line of treatment, if available.
Grade A, strong recommendation for PTBM
Methylphenidate may be considered if these behavioral interventions do not provide
signiﬁcant improvement and there is moderate-to-severe continued disturbance in the
4- through 5-year-old child’s functioning. In areas in which evidence-based behavioral
treatments are not available, the clinician needs to weigh the risks of starting
medication before the age of 6 years against the harm of delaying treatment.
Grade B, strong recommendation for methylphenidate
KAS 5b. For elementary and middle school-aged children (age 6 years to the 12th birthday)
with ADHD, the PCC should prescribe FDA-approved medications for ADHD, along with
PTBM and/or behavioral classroom intervention (preferably both PTBM and behavioral
classroom interventions). Educational interventions and individualized instructional
supports, including school environment, class placement, instructional placement, and
behavioral supports, are a necessary part of any treatment plan and often include an IEP
or a rehabilitation plan (504 plan).
Grade A, strong recommendation for medications
Grade A, strong recommendation for training and behavioral
treatments for ADHD with family and school
KAS 5c. For adolescents (age 12 years to the 18th birthday) with ADHD, the PCC should
prescribe FDA-approved medications for ADHD with the adolescent’s assent. The PCC is
encouraged to prescribe evidence-based training interventions and/or behavioral
interventions as treatment of ADHD, if available. Educational interventions and
individualized instructional supports, including school environment, class placement,
instructional placement, and behavioral supports, are a necessary part of any treatment
plan and often include an IEP or a rehabilitation plan (504 plan).
Grade A, strong recommendation for medications
Grade A, strong recommendation for training and behavioral
treatments for ADHD with the family and school
KAS 6. The PCC should titrate doses of medication for ADHD to achieve maximum beneﬁt with
tolerable side effects.
Grade B, strong recommendation
KAS 7. The PCC, if trained or experienced in diagnosing comorbid conditions, may initiate
treatment of such conditions or make a referral to an appropriate subspecialist for
treatment. After detecting possible comorbid conditions, if the PCC is not trained or
experienced in making the diagnosis or initiating treatment, the patient should be
referred to an appropriate subspecialist to make the diagnosis and initiate treatment.
Grade C, recommendation
6
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from publications.​aap.​org/​pediatrics/​article-pdf/​144/​4/​e20192528/​1443490/​peds_20192528.​pdf
by guest
[/PAGE 6]

[PAGE 7]
PoCA for more information on
implementing this KAS.)
Special Circumstances: Preschool-Aged
Children (Age 4 Years to the Sixth
Birthday)
There is evidence that the diagnostic
criteria for ADHD can be applied to
preschool-aged children.33–39 A
review of the literature, including the
multisite study of the efﬁcacy of
methylphenidate in preschool-aged
children, found that the DSM-5
criteria could appropriately identify
children with ADHD.25
To make a diagnosis of ADHD in
preschool-aged children, clinicians
should conduct a clinical interview
with parents, examine and observe
the child, and obtain information
from parents and teachers through
DSM-based ADHD rating scales.40
Normative data are available for the
DSM-5–based rating scales for ages
5 years to the 18th birthday.41 There
are, however, minimal changes in the
speciﬁc behaviors from the DSM-IV,
on which all the other DSM-based
ADHD rating scales obtained
normative data. Both the ADHD
Rating Scale-IV and the Conners
Rating Scale have preschool-age
normative data based on the DSM-IV.
The speciﬁc behaviors in the DSM-5
criteria for ADHD are the same for all
children younger than 18 years (ie,
preschool-aged children, elementary
and middle school–aged children, and
adolescents) and are only minimally
different from the DSM-IV. Hence, if
clinicians do not have the ADHD
Rating Scale-5 or the ADHD Rating
Scale-IV Preschool Version,42 any
other DSM-based scale can be used to
provide a systematic method for
collecting information from parents
and teachers, even in the absence of
normative data.
Pediatricians and other PCCs should
be aware that determining the
presence of key symptoms in this age
group has its challenges, such as
TABLE 2 KAS 1: The pediatrician or other PCC should initiate an evaluation for ADHD for any child or adolescent age 4 years to the 18th birthday who
presents with academic or behavioral problems and symptoms of inattention, hyperactivity, or impulsivity. (Grade B: strong recommendation.)
Aggregate evidence
quality
Grade B
Beneﬁts
ADHD goes undiagnosed in a considerable number of children and adolescents. Primary care clinicians’ more-rigorous identiﬁcation
of children with these problems is likely to decrease the rate of undiagnosed and untreated ADHD in children and adolescents.
Risks, harm, cost
Children and adolescents in whom ADHD is inappropriately diagnosed may be labeled inappropriately, or another condition may be
missed, and they may receive treatments that will not beneﬁt them.
Beneﬁt-harm
assessment
The high prevalence of ADHD and limited mental health resources require primary care pediatricians and other PCCs to play
a signiﬁcant role in the care of patients with ADHD and assist them to receive appropriate diagnosis and treatment. Treatments
available have good evidence of efﬁcacy, and a lack of treatment has the risk of impaired outcomes.
Intentional vagueness
There are limits between what a PCC can address and what should be referred to a subspecialist because of varying degrees of skills
and comfort levels present among the former.
Role of patient
preferences
Success with treatment is dependent on patient and family preference, which need to be taken into account.
Exclusions
None.
Strength
Strong recommendation.
Key references
Wolraich et al31; Visser et al28; Thomas et al8; Egger et al30
TABLE 3 KAS 2: To make a diagnosis of ADHD, the PCC should determine that DSM-5 criteria have been met, including documentation of symptoms and
impairment in more than 1 major setting (ie, social, academic, or occupational), with information obtained primarily from reports from parents
or guardians, teachers, other school personnel, and mental health clinicians who are involved in the child or adolescent’s care. The PCC should
also rule out any alternative cause. (Grade B: strong recommendation.)
Aggregate evidence
quality
Grade B
Beneﬁts
Use of the DSM-5 criteria has led to more uniform categorization of the condition across professional disciplines. The criteria are
essentially unchanged from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition (DSM-IV), for children up to
their 18th birthday, except that DSM-IV required onset prior to age 7 for a diagnosis, while DSM-5 requires onset prior to age 12.
Risks, harm, cost
The DSM-5 does not speciﬁcally state that symptoms must be beyond expected levels for developmental (rather than chronologic) age
to qualify for an ADHD diagnosis, which may lead to some misdiagnoses in children with developmental disorders.
Beneﬁt-harm
assessment
The beneﬁts far outweigh the harm.
Intentional vagueness
None.
Role of patient
preferences
Although there is some stigma associated with mental disorder diagnoses, resulting in some families preferring other diagnoses, the
need for better clarity in diagnoses outweighs this preference.
Exclusions
None.
Strength
Strong recommendation.
Key references
Evans et al25; McGoey et al42; Young43; Sibley et al46
PEDIATRICS Volume 144, number 4, October 2019
7
Downloaded from publications.​aap.​org/​pediatrics/​article-pdf/​144/​4/​e20192528/​1443490/​peds_20192528.​pdf
by guest
[/PAGE 7]

[PAGE 8]
observing symptoms across multiple
settings as required by the DSM-5,
particularly among children who do
not attend a preschool or child care
program. Here, too, focused checklists
can be used to aid in the diagnostic
evaluation.
PTBM is the recommended primary
intervention for preschool-aged
children with ADHD as well as
children with ADHD-like behaviors
whose diagnosis is not yet veriﬁed.
This type of training helps parents
learn age-appropriate developmental
expectations, behaviors that
strengthen the parent-child
relationship, and speciﬁc
management skills for problem
behaviors. Clinicians do not need to
have made an ADHD diagnosis before
recommending PTBM because PTBM
has documented effectiveness with
a wide variety of problem behaviors,
regardless of etiology. In addition, the
intervention’s results may inform the
subsequent diagnostic evaluation.
Clinicians are encouraged to
recommend that parents complete
PTBM, if available, before assigning
an ADHD diagnosis.
After behavioral parent training is
implemented, the clinician can
obtain information from parents and
teachers through DSM-5–based
ADHD rating scales. The clinician
may obtain reports about the
parents’ ability to manage their
children and about the child’s core
symptoms and impairments.
Referral to an early intervention
program or enrolling in a PTBM
program can help provide
information about the child’s
behavior in other settings or with
other observers. The evaluators for
these programs and/or early
childhood special education teachers
may be useful observers, as well.
Special Circumstances: Adolescents
(Age 12 Years to the 18th Birthday)
Obtaining teacher reports for
adolescents is often more challenging
than for younger children because
many adolescents have multiple
teachers. Likewise, an adolescent’s
parents may have less opportunity to
observe their child’s behaviors than
they did when the child was younger.
Furthermore, some problems
experienced by children with ADHD
are less obvious in adolescents than
in younger children because
adolescents are less likely to exhibit
overt hyperactive behavior. Of note,
adolescents’ reports of their own
behaviors often differ from other
observers because they tend to
minimize their own problematic
behaviors.43–45
Despite these difﬁculties, clinicians
need to try to obtain information
from at least 2 teachers or other
sources, such as coaches, school
guidance counselors, or leaders of
community activities in which the
adolescent participates.46 For the
evaluation to be successful, it is
essential that adolescents agree with
and participate in the evaluation.
Variability in ratings is to be
expected because adolescents’
behavior often varies between
different classrooms and with
different teachers. Identifying
reasons for any variability can
provide valuable clinical insight into
the adolescent’s problems.
Note that, unless they previously
received a diagnosis, to meet DSM-5
criteria for ADHD, adolescents must
have some reported or documented
manifestations of inattention or
hyperactivity/impulsivity before age
12. Therefore, clinicians must
establish that an adolescent had
manifestations of ADHD before age
12 and strongly consider whether
a mimicking or comorbid condition,
such as substance use, depression,
and/or anxiety, is present.46
In addition, the risks of mood and
anxiety disorders and risky sexual
behaviors increase during
adolescence, as do the risks of
intentional self-harm and suicidal
behaviors.31 Clinicians should also
be aware that adolescents are at
greater risk for substance use than
are younger children.44,45,47 Certain
substances, such as marijuana, can
have effects that mimic ADHD;
adolescent patients may also attempt
to obtain stimulant medication to
enhance performance (ie, academic,
athletic, etc) by feigning symptoms.48
Trauma experiences, posttraumatic
stress disorder, and toxic stress are
additional comorbidities and risk
factors of concern.
Special Circumstances: Inattention or
Hyperactivity/Impulsivity (Problem
Level)
Teachers, parents, and child health
professionals typically encounter
children who demonstrate behaviors
relating to activity level, impulsivity,
and inattention but who do not fully
meet DSM-5 criteria. When assessing
these children, diagnostic criteria
should be closely reviewed, which
may require obtaining more
information from other settings and
sources. Also consider that these
symptoms may suggest other
problems that mimic ADHD.
Behavioral interventions, such
as PTBM, are often beneﬁcial for
children with hyperactive/impulsive
behaviors who do not meet full
diagnostic criteria for ADHD.
As noted previously, these programs
do not require a speciﬁc diagnosis
to be beneﬁcial to the family. The
previous guideline discussed
the diagnosis of problem-level
concerns on the basis of the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual for
Primary Care (DSM-PC), Child and
Adolescent Version,49 and made
suggestions for treatment and care.
The DSM-PC was published in 1995,
however, and it has not been revised
to be compatible with the DSM-5.
Therefore, the DSM-PC cannot be
used as a deﬁnitive source for
diagnostic codes related to ADHD and
comorbid conditions, although it can
be used conceptually as a resource for
8
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from publications.​aap.​org/​pediatrics/​article-pdf/​144/​4/​e20192528/​1443490/​peds_20192528.​pdf
by guest
[/PAGE 8]

[PAGE 9]
enriching the understanding of
problem-level manifestations.
KAS 3
In the evaluation of a child or
adolescent for ADHD, the PCC should
include a process to at least screen
for comorbid conditions, including
emotional or behavioral conditions
(eg, anxiety, depression, oppositional
deﬁant disorder, conduct disorders,
substance use), developmental
conditions (eg, learning and language
disorders, autism spectrum
disorders), and physical conditions
(eg, tics, sleep apnea) (Table 4).
(Grade B: strong recommendation.)
The majority of both boys and girls
with ADHD also meet diagnostic
criteria for another mental
disorder.17,18 A variety of other
behavioral, developmental, and
physical conditions can be comorbid
in children and adolescents who are
evaluated for ADHD, including
emotional or behavioral conditions or
a history of these problems. These
include but are not limited to learning
disabilities, language disorder,
disruptive behavior, anxiety, mood
disorders, tic disorders, seizures,
autism spectrum disorder,
developmental coordination disorder,
and sleep disorders.50–66 In some
cases, the presence of a comorbid
condition will alter the treatment
of ADHD.
The SDBP is developing a clinical
practice guideline to support
clinicians in the diagnosis of
treatment of “complex ADHD,” which
includes ADHD with comorbid
developmental and/or mental health
conditions.67
Special Circumstances: Adolescents
(Age 12 Years to the 18th Birthday)
At a minimum, clinicians should
assess adolescent patients with newly
diagnosed ADHD for symptoms and
signs of substance use, anxiety,
depression, and learning disabilities.
As noted, all 4 are common comorbid
conditions that affect the treatment
approach. These comorbidities make
it important for the clinician to
consider sequencing psychosocial and
medication treatments to maximize
the impact on areas of greatest risk
and impairment while monitoring for
possible risks such as stimulant abuse
or suicidal ideation.
KAS 4
ADHD is a chronic condition;
therefore, the PCC should manage
children and adolescents with ADHD
in the same manner that they would
children and youth with special
health care needs, following the
principles of the chronic care model
and the medical home (Table 5).
(Grade B: strong recommendation.)
As in the 2 previous guidelines, this
recommendation is based on the
evidence that for many individuals,
ADHD causes symptoms and
dysfunction over long periods of time,
even into adulthood. Available
treatments address symptoms and
function but are usually not curative.
Although the chronic illness model
has not been speciﬁcally studied in
children and adolescents with ADHD,
it has been effective for other chronic
conditions, such as asthma.68 In
addition, the medical home model has
been accepted as the preferred
standard of care for children with
chronic conditions.69
The medical home and chronic illness
approach may be particularly
beneﬁcial for parents who also have
ADHD themselves. These parents can
beneﬁt from extra support to help
them follow a consistent schedule for
medication and behavioral programs.
Authors of longitudinal studies have
found that ADHD treatments are
frequently not maintained over
time13 and impairments persist into
adulthood.70 It is indicated in
prospective studies that patients with
ADHD, whether treated or not, are at
increased risk for early death, suicide,
and increased psychiatric
TABLE 4 KAS 3: In the evaluation of a child or adolescent for ADHD, the PCC should include a process to at least screen for comorbid conditions, including
emotional or behavioral conditions (eg, anxiety, depression, oppositional deﬁant disorder, conduct disorders, substance use), developmental
conditions (eg, learning and language disorders, autism spectrum disorders), and physical conditions (eg, tics, sleep apnea). (Grade B: strong
recommendation.)
Aggregate evidence
quality
Grade B
Beneﬁts
Identifying comorbid conditions is important in developing the most appropriate treatment plan for the child or adolescent with
ADHD.
Risks, harm, cost
The major risk is misdiagnosing the comorbid condition(s) and providing inappropriate care.
Beneﬁt-harm
assessment
There is a preponderance of beneﬁts over harm.
Intentional vagueness
None.
Role of patient
preferences
None.
Exclusions
None.
Strength
Strong recommendation.
Key references
Cuffe et al51; Pastor and Reuben52; Bieiderman et al53; Bieiderman et al54; Bieiderman et al72; Crabtree et al57; LeBourgeois et al58;
Chan115; Newcorn et al60; Sung et al61; Larson et al66; Mahajan et al65; Antshel et al64; Rothenberger and Roessner63; Froehlich et al62
PEDIATRICS Volume 144, number 4, October 2019
9
Downloaded from publications.​aap.​org/​pediatrics/​article-pdf/​144/​4/​e20192528/​1443490/​peds_20192528.​pdf
by guest
[/PAGE 9]

[PAGE 10]
comorbidity, particularly substance
use disorders.71,72 They also have
lower educational achievement than
those without ADHD73,74 and
increased rates of incarceration.75–77
Treatment discontinuation also
places individuals with ADHD at
higher risk for catastrophic
outcomes, such as motor vehicle
crashes78,79; criminality, including
drug-related crimes77 and violent
reoffending76; depression71;
interpersonal issues80; and other
injuries.81,82
To continue providing the best care, it
is important for a treating
pediatrician or other PCC to engage in
bidirectional communication with
teachers and other school personnel
as well as mental health clinicians
involved in the child or adolescent’s
care. This communication can be
difﬁcult to achieve and is discussed in
both the PoCA and the section on
systemic barriers to the care of
children and adolescents with ADHD
in the Supplemental Information, as is
the medical home model.69
Special Circumstances: Inattention
or Hyperactivity/Impulsivity
(Problem Level)
Children with inattention or
hyperactivity/impulsivity at the
problem level, as well as their
families, may also beneﬁt from the
chronic illness and medical home
principles.
Recommendations for the Treatment
of Children and Adolescents With
ADHD: KAS 5a, 5b, and 5c
Recommendations vary depending on
the patient’s age and are presented
for the following age ranges:
a. preschool-aged children: age
4 years to the sixth birthday;
b. elementary and middle
school–aged children: age 6 years
to the 12th birthday; and
c. adolescents: age 12 years to the
18th birthday.
The KASs are presented, followed by
information on medication,
psychosocial treatments, and special
circumstances.
KAS 5a
For preschool-aged children (age
4 years to the sixth birthday) with
ADHD, the PCC should prescribe
evidence-based behavioral PTBM
and/or behavioral classroom
interventions as the ﬁrst line of
treatment, if available (grade A:
strong recommendation).
Methylphenidate may be considered
if these behavioral interventions do
not provide signiﬁcant improvement
and there is moderate-to-severe
continued disturbance in the 4-
through 5-year-old child’s
functioning. In areas in which
evidence-based behavioral
treatments are not available, the
clinician needs to weigh the risks of
starting medication before the age of
6 years against the harm of delaying
treatment (Table 6). (Grade B: strong
recommendation.)
A number of special circumstances
support the recommendation to
initiate PTBM as the ﬁrst treatment
of preschool-aged children (age
4 years to the sixth birthday) with
ADHD.25,83 Although it was limited to
children who had moderate-to-
severe dysfunction, the largest
multisite study of methylphenidate
use in preschool-aged children
revealed symptom improvements
after PTBM alone.83 The overall
evidence for PTBM among
preschoolers is strong.
PTBM programs for preschool-aged
children are typically group programs
and, although they are not always
paid for by health insurance, they
may be relatively low cost. One
evidence-based PTBM, parent-child
interaction therapy, is a dyadic
therapy for parent and child. The
PoCA contains criteria for the
clinician’s use to assess the quality of
PTBM programs. If the child attends
preschool, behavioral classroom
interventions are also recommended.
In addition, preschool programs (such
as Head Start) and ADHD-focused
organizations (such as CHADD84) can
also provide behavioral supports. The
issues related to referral, payment,
and communication are discussed in
the section on systemic barriers in
the Supplemental Information.
TABLE 5 KAS 4: ADHD is a chronic condition; therefore, the PCC should manage children and adolescents with ADHD in the same manner that they would
children and youth with special health care needs, following the principles of the chronic care model and the medical home. (Grade B: strong
recommendation.)
Aggregate evidence quality
Grade B
Beneﬁts
The recommendation describes the coordinated services that are most appropriate to manage the condition.
Risks, harm, cost
Providing these services may be more costly.
Beneﬁt-harm assessment
There is a preponderance of beneﬁts over harm.
Intentional vagueness
None.
Role of patient
preferences
Family preference in how these services are provided is an important consideration, because it can increase adherence.
Exclusions
None
Strength
Strong recommendation.
Key references
Brito et al69; Biederman et al72; Schefﬂer et al74; Barbaresi et al75; Chang et al71; Chang et al78; Lichtenstein et al77; Harstad and
Levy80
10
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from publications.​aap.​org/​pediatrics/​article-pdf/​144/​4/​e20192528/​1443490/​peds_20192528.​pdf
by guest
[/PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]
In areas in which evidence-based
behavioral treatments are not
available, the clinician needs to
weigh the risks of starting
methylphenidate before the age
of 6 years against the harm of
delaying diagnosis and treatment.
Other stimulant or nonstimulant
medications have not been
adequately studied in children in
this age group with ADHD.
KAS 5b
For elementary and middle
school–aged children (age 6 years to
the 12th birthday) with ADHD, the
PCC should prescribe US Food and
Drug Administration (FDA)–approved
medications for ADHD, along with
PTBM and/or behavioral classroom
intervention (preferably both PTBM
and behavioral classroom interven-
tions). Educational interventions
and individualized instructional
supports, including school environment,
class placement, instructional
placement, and behavioral supports,
are a necessary part of any
treatment plan and often include an
Individualized Education Program
(IEP) or a rehabilitation plan (504
plan) (Table 7). (Grade A: strong
recommendation for medications;
grade A: strong recommendation for
PTBM training and behavioral
treatments for ADHD implemented
with the family and school.)
The evidence is particularly strong for
stimulant medications; it is sufﬁcient,
but not as strong, for atomoxetine,
extended-release guanfacine, and
extended-release clonidine, in that
order (see the Treatment section, and
see the PoCA for more information on
implementation).
KAS 5c
For adolescents (age 12 years to the
18th birthday) with ADHD, the PCC
should prescribe FDA-approved
medications for ADHD with the
adolescent’s assent (grade A: strong
recommendation). The PCC is
encouraged to prescribe evidence-
based training interventions and/or
behavioral interventions as treatment
of ADHD, if available. Educational
interventions and individualized
instructional supports, including
school environment, class
placement, instructional placement,
and behavioral supports, are
a necessary part of any treatment
plan and often include an IEP or
a rehabilitation plan (504 plan)
(Table 8). (Grade A: strong
recommendation.)
Transition to adult care is an
important component of the chronic
care model for ADHD. Planning for
the transition to adult care is an
ongoing process that may culminate
after high school or, perhaps, after
college. To foster a smooth transition,
it is best to introduce components at
the start of high school, at about
14 years of age, and speciﬁcally focus
during the 2 years preceding high
school completion.
Psychosocial Treatments
Some psychosocial treatments for
children and adolescents with ADHD
have been demonstrated to be
effective for the treatment of ADHD,
including behavioral therapy and
training interventions.24–26,85 The
diversity of interventions and
outcome measures makes it
challenging to assess a meta-analysis
of psychosocial treatment’s effects
alone or in association with
medication treatment. As with
medication treatment, the long-term
positive effects of psychosocial
treatments have yet to be determined.
Nonetheless, ongoing adherence
to psychosocial treatment is
a key contributor to its beneﬁcial
effects, making implementation of
a chronic care model for child health
important to ensure sustained
adherence.86
Behavioral therapy involves training
adults to inﬂuence the contingencies
in an environment to improve the
behavior of a child or adolescent in
that setting. It can help parents and
school personnel learn how to
effectively prevent and respond to
adolescent behaviors such as
TABLE 6 KAS 5a: For preschool-aged children (age 4 years to the sixth birthday) with ADHD, the PCC should prescribe evidence-based behavioral PTBM
and/or behavioral classroom interventions as the ﬁrst line of treatment, if available (grade A: strong recommendation). Methylphenidate may be
considered if these behavioral interventions do not provide signiﬁcant improvement and there is moderate-to-severe continued disturbance in
the 4- through 5-year-old child’s functioning. In areas in which evidence-based behavioral treatments are not available, the clinician needs to
weigh the risks of starting medication before the age of 6 years against the harm of delaying treatment (grade B: strong recommendation).
Aggregate evidence
quality
Grade A for PTBM; Grade B for methylphenidate
Beneﬁts
Given the risks of untreated ADHD, the beneﬁts outweigh the risks.
Risks, harm, cost
Both therapies increase the cost of care; PTBM requires a high level of family involvement, whereas methylphenidate has some
potential adverse effects.
Beneﬁt-harm
assessment
Both PTBM and methylphenidate have relatively low risks; initiating treatment at an early age, before children experience repeated
failure, has additional beneﬁts. Thus, the beneﬁts outweigh the risks.
Intentional vagueness
None.
Role of patient
preferences
Family preference is essential in determining the treatment plan.
Exclusions
None.
Strength
Strong recommendation.
Key references
Greenhill et al83; Evans et al25
PEDIATRICS Volume 144, number 4, October 2019
11
Downloaded from publications.​aap.​org/​pediatrics/​article-pdf/​144/​4/​e20192528/​1443490/​peds_20192528.​pdf
by guest
[/PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]
interrupting, aggression, not
completing tasks, and not complying
with requests. Behavioral parent and
classroom training are well-
established treatments with
preadolescent children.25,87,88 Most
studies comparing behavior therapy
to stimulants indicate that stimulants
have a stronger immediate effect on
the 18 core symptoms of ADHD.
Parents, however, were more satisﬁed
with the effect of behavioral therapy,
which addresses symptoms and
functions in addition to ADHD’s core
symptoms. The positive effects of
behavioral therapies tend to persist,
but the positive effects of medication
cease when medication stops.
Optimal care is likely to occur when
both therapies are used, but the
decision about therapies is heavily
dependent on acceptability by, and
feasibility for, the family.
Training interventions target skill
development and involve repeated
practice with performance feedback
over time, rather than modifying
behavioral contingencies in a speciﬁc
setting. Less research has been
conducted on training interventions
compared to behavioral treatments;
nonetheless, training interventions
are well-established treatments to
target disorganization of materials
and time that are exhibited by
most youth with ADHD; it is likely
that they will beneﬁt younger
children, as well.25,89 Some training
interventions, including social
skills training, have not been shown
to be effective for children with
ADHD.25
TABLE 7 KAS 5b: For elementary and middle school–aged children (age 6 years to the 12th birthday) with ADHD, the PCC should prescribe US Food and
Drug Administration (FDA)–approved medications for ADHD, along with PTBM and/or behavioral classroom intervention (preferably both PTBM
and behavioral classroom interventions). Educational interventions and individualized instructional supports, including school environment,
class placement, instructional placement, and behavioral supports, are a necessary part of any treatment plan and often include an
Individualized Education Program (IEP) or a rehabilitation plan (504 plan). (Grade A: strong recommendation for medications; grade A: strong
recommendation for PTBM training and behavioral treatments for ADHD implemented with the family and school.)
Aggregate evidence
quality
Grade A for Treatment with FDA-Approved Medications; Grade A for Training and Behavioral Treatments for ADHD With the Family and
School.
Beneﬁts
Both behavioral therapy and FDA-approved medications have been shown to reduce behaviors associated with ADHD and to improve
function.
Risks, harm, cost
Both therapies increase the cost of care. Psychosocial therapy requires a high level of family and/or school involvement and may lead
to increased family conﬂict, especially if treatment is not successfully completed. FDA-approved medications may have some
adverse effects and discontinuation of medication is common among adolescents.
Beneﬁt-harm
assessment
Given the risks of untreated ADHD, the beneﬁts outweigh the risks.
Intentional vagueness
None.
Role of patient
preferences
Family preference, including patient preference, is essential in determining the treatment plan and enhancing adherence.
Exclusions
None.
Strength
Strong recommendation.
Key references
Evans et al25; Barbaresi et al73; Jain et al103; Brown and Bishop104; Kambeitz et al105; Bruxel et al106; Kieling et al107; Froehlich et al108;
Joensen et al109
TABLE 8 KAS 5c: For adolescents (age 12 years to the 18th birthday) with ADHD, the PCC should prescribe FDA-approved medications for ADHD with the
adolescent’s assent (grade A: strong recommendation). The PCC is encouraged to prescribe evidence-based training interventions and/or
behavioral interventions as treatment of ADHD, if available. Educational interventions and individualized instructional supports, including school
environment, class placement, instructional placement, and behavioral supports, are a necessary part of any treatment plan and often include
an IEP or a rehabilitation plan (504 plan). (Grade A: strong recommendation.)
Aggregate evidence
quality
Grade A for Medications; Grade A for Training and Behavioral Therapy
Beneﬁts
Training interventions, behavioral therapy, and FDA-approved medications have been demonstrated to reduce behaviors associated
with ADHD and to improve function.
Risks, harm, cost
Both therapies increase the cost of care. Psychosocial therapy requires a high level of family and/or school involvement and may lead
to unintended increased family conﬂict, especially if treatment is not successfully completed. FDA-approved medications may have
some adverse effects, and discontinuation of medication is common among adolescents.
Beneﬁt-harm
assessment
Given the risks of untreated ADHD, the beneﬁts outweigh the risks.
Intentional vagueness
None.
Role of patient
preferences
Family preference, including patient preference, is likely to predict engagement and persistence with a treatment.
Exclusions
None.
Strength
Strong recommendation.
Key references
Evans et al25; Webster-Stratton et al87; Evans et al95; Fabiano et al93; Sibley and Graziano et al94; Langberg et al96; Schultz et al97; Brown
and Bishop104; Kambeitz et al105; Bruxel et al106; Froehlich et al108; Joensen et al109
12
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from publications.​aap.​org/​pediatrics/​article-pdf/​144/​4/​e20192528/​1443490/​peds_20192528.​pdf
by guest
[/PAGE 12]

[PAGE 13]
Some nonmedication treatments for
ADHD-related problems have either
too little evidence to recommend them
or have been found to have little or no
beneﬁt. These include mindfulness,
cognitive training, diet modiﬁcation,
EEG biofeedback, and supportive
counseling. The suggestion that
cannabidiol oil has any effect on ADHD
is anecdotal and has not been
subjected to rigorous study. Although
it is FDA approved, the efﬁcacy for
external trigeminal nerve stimulation
(eTNS) is documented by one 5-week
randomized controlled trial with just
30 participants receiving eTNS.90 To
date, there is no long-term safety and
efﬁcacy evidence for eTNS. Overall, the
current evidence supporting
treatment of ADHD with eTNS is
sparse and in no way approaches the
robust strength of evidence
documented for established
medication and behavioral treatments
for ADHD; therefore, it cannot be
recommended as a treatment of ADHD
without considerably more extensive
study on its efﬁcacy and safety.
Special Circumstances: Adolescents
Much less research has been
published on psychosocial treatments
with adolescents than with younger
children. PTBM has been modiﬁed to
include the parents and adolescents
in sessions together to develop
a behavioral contract and improve
parent-adolescent communication
and problem-solving (see above).91
Some training programs also include
motivational interviewing
approaches. The evidence for this
behavioral family approach is mixed
and less strong than PTBM with pre-
adolescent children.92–94 Adolescents’
responses to behavioral contingencies
are more varied than those of
younger children because they can
often effectively obstruct behavioral
contracts, increasing parent-
adolescent conﬂict.
Training approaches that are focused
on school functioning skills have
consistently revealed beneﬁts for
adolescents.95–97 The greatest
beneﬁts from training interventions
occur when treatment is continued
over an extended period of time,
performance feedback is constructive
and frequent, and the target
behaviors are directly applicable to
the adolescent’s daily functioning.
Overall, behavioral family approaches
may be helpful to some adolescents
and their families, and school-based
training interventions are well
established.25,94 Meaningful
improvements in functioning have
not been reported from cognitive
behavioral approaches.
Medication for ADHD
Preschool-aged children may
experience increased mood lability
and dysphoria with stimulant
medications.83 None of the
nonstimulants have FDA approval for
use in preschool-aged children. For
elementary school–aged students, the
evidence is particularly strong for
stimulant medications and is
sufﬁcient, but less strong, for
atomoxetine, extended-release
guanfacine, and extended-release
clonidine (in that order). The effect
size for stimulants is 1.0 and for
nonstimulants is 0.7. An individual’s
response to methylphenidate verses
amphetamine is idiosyncratic, with
approximately 40% responding to
both and about 40% responding to
only 1. The subtype of ADHD does not
appear to be a predictor of response
to a speciﬁc agent. For most
adolescents, stimulant medications
are highly effective in reducing
ADHD’s core symptoms.73
Stimulant medications have an effect
size of around 1.0 (effect size =
[treatment M 2 control M)/control
SD]) for the treatment of ADHD.98
Among nonstimulant medications, 1
selective norepinephrine reuptake
inhibitor, atomoxetine,99,100 and 2
selective a-2 adrenergic agonists,
extended-release guanfacine101,102
and extended-release clonidine,103
have also demonstrated efﬁcacy in
reducing core symptoms among
school-aged children and adolescents,
although their effect sizes, —around
0.7 for all 3, are less robust than that
of stimulant medications.
Norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors
and a-2 adrenergic agonists are
newer medications, so, in general, the
evidence base supporting them is
considerably less than that for
stimulants, although it was adequate
for FDA approval.
A free list of the currently available,
FDA-approved medications for ADHD
is available online at www.
ADHDMedicationGuide.com. Each
medication’s characteristics are
provided to help guide the clinician’s
prescription choice. With the
expanded list of medications, it is less
likely that PCCs need to consider the
off-label use of other medications.
The section on systemic barriers in
the Supplemental Information
provides suggestions for fostering
more realistic and effective payment
and communication systems.
Because of the large variability in
patients’ response to ADHD
medication, there is great interest in
pharmacogenetic tools that can help
clinicians predict the best medication
and dose for each child or adolescent.
At this time, however, the available
scientiﬁc literature does not provide
sufﬁcient evidence to support their
clinical utility given that the genetic
variants assayed by these tools have
generally not been fully studied with
respect to medication effects on
ADHD-related symptoms and/or
impairment, study ﬁndings are
inconsistent, or effect sizes are not of
sufﬁcient size to ensure clinical
utility.104–109 For that reason, these
pharmacogenetics tools are not
recommended. In addition, these tests
may cost thousands of dollars and are
typically not covered by insurance.
For a pharmacogenetics tool to be
recommended for clinical use, studies
would need to reveal (1) the genetic
variants assayed have consistent,
replicated associations with
PEDIATRICS Volume 144, number 4, October 2019
13
Downloaded from publications.​aap.​org/​pediatrics/​article-pdf/​144/​4/​e20192528/​1443490/​peds_20192528.​pdf
by guest
[/PAGE 13]

[PAGE 14]
medication response; (2) knowledge
about a patient’s genetic proﬁle
would change clinical decision-
making, improve outcomes and/or
reduce costs or burden; and (3) the
acceptability of the test’s operating
characteristics has been
demonstrated (eg, sensitivity,
speciﬁcity, and reliability).
Side Effects
Stimulants’ most common short-term
adverse effects are appetite loss,
abdominal pain, headaches, and
sleep disturbance. The Multimodal
Treatment of Attention Deﬁcit
Hyperactivity Disorder (MTA) study
results identiﬁed stimulants as having
a more persistent effect on decreasing
growth velocity compared to most
previous studies.110 Diminished
growth was in the range of 1 to 2 cm
from predicted adult height. The
results of the MTA study were
particularly noted among children
who were on higher and more
consistently administered doses of
stimulants.110 The effects diminished
by the third year of treatment, but no
compensatory rebound growth was
observed.110 An uncommon signiﬁcant
adverse effect of stimulants is the
occurrence of hallucinations and other
psychotic symptoms.111
Stimulant medications, on average,
increase patient heart rate (HR) and
blood pressure (BP) to a mild and
clinically insigniﬁcant degree (average
increases: 1–2 beats per minute for HR
and 1–4 mm Hg for systolic and
diastolic BP).112 However, because
stimulants have been linked to more
substantial increases in HR and BP in
a subset of individuals (5%–15%),
clinicians are encouraged to monitor
these vital signs in patients receiving
stimulant treatment.112 Although
concerns have been raised about
sudden cardiac death among children
and adolescents using stimulant and
medications,113 it is an extremely rare
occurrence. In fact, stimulant
medications have not been shown to
increase the risk of sudden death
beyond that observed in children who
are not receiving stimulants.114–118
Nevertheless, before initiating therapy
with stimulant medications, it is
important to obtain the child or
adolescent’s history of speciﬁc cardiac
symptoms in addition to the family
history of sudden death,
cardiovascular symptoms, Wolff-
Parkinson-White syndrome,
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and
long QT syndrome. If any of these risk
factors are present, clinicians should
obtain additional evaluation to
ascertain and address potential safety
concerns of stimulant medication use
by the child or adolescent.112,114
Among nonstimulants, the risk of
serious cardiovascular events is
extremely low, as it is for stimulants.
The 3 nonstimulant medications that
are FDA approved to treat ADHD (ie,
atomoxetine, guanfacine, and
clonidine) may be associated with
changes in cardiovascular parameters
or other serious cardiovascular events.
These events could include increased
HR and BP for atomoxetine and
decreased HR and BP for guanfacine
and clonidine. Clinicians are
recommended to not only obtain the
personal and family cardiac history, as
detailed above, but also to perform
additional evaluation if risk factors are
present before starting nonstimulant
medications (ie, perform an
electrocardiogram [ECG] and possibly
refer to a pediatric cardiologist if the
ECG is not normal).112
Additional adverse effects of
atomoxetine include initial
somnolence and gastrointestinal tract
symptoms, particularly if the dosage is
increased too rapidly, and decreased
appetite.119–122 Less commonly, an
increase in suicidal thoughts has been
found; this is noted by an FDA black
box warning. Extremely rarely,
hepatitis has been associated with
atomoxetine. Atomoxetine has also
been linked to growth delays
compared to expected trajectories in
the ﬁrst 1 to 2 years of treatment, with
a return to expected measurements
after 2 to 3 years of treatment, on
average. Decreases were observed
among those who were taller or
heavier than average before
treatment.123
For extended-release guanfacine and
extended-release clonidine, adverse
effects include somnolence, dry
mouth, dizziness, irritability,
headache, bradycardia, hypotension,
and abdominal pain.30,124,125 Because
rebound hypertension after abrupt
guanfacine and clonidine
discontinuation has been
observed,126 these medications
should be tapered off rather than
suddenly discontinued.
Adjunctive Therapy
Adjunctive therapies may be
considered if stimulant therapy is not
fully effective or limited by side
effects. Only extended-release
guanfacine and extended-release
clonidine have evidence supporting
their use as adjunctive therapy with
stimulant medications sufﬁcient to
have achieved FDA approval.127 Other
medications have been used in
combination on an off-label basis,
with some limited evidence available
to support the efﬁcacy and safety of
using atomoxetine in combination
with stimulant medications to
augment treatment of ADHD.128
Special Circumstances: Preschool-Aged
Children (Age 4 Years to the Sixth
Birthday)
If children do not experience
adequate symptom improvement
with PTBM, medication can be
prescribed for those with moderate-
to-severe ADHD. Many young children
with ADHD may require medication
to achieve maximum improvement;
methylphenidate is the recommended
ﬁrst-line pharmacologic treatment of
preschool children because of the lack
of sufﬁcient rigorous study in the
preschool-aged population for
nonstimulant ADHD medications and
dextroamphetamine. Although
amphetamine is the only medication
14
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from publications.​aap.​org/​pediatrics/​article-pdf/​144/​4/​e20192528/​1443490/​peds_20192528.​pdf
by guest
[/PAGE 14]

[PAGE 15]
with FDA approval for use in children
younger than 6 years, this authorization
was issued at a time when approval
criteria were less stringent than current
requirements. Hence, the available
evidence regarding dextroampheta-
mine’s use in preschool-aged children
with ADHD is not adequate to
recommend it as an initial ADHD
medication treatment at this time.80
No nonstimulant medication has
received sufﬁcient rigorous study in
the preschool-aged population to be
recommended for treatment of ADHD
of children 4 through 5 years of age.
Although methylphenidate is the
ADHD medication with the strongest
evidence for safety and efﬁcacy in
preschool-aged children, it should be
noted that the evidence has not yet
met the level needed for FDA
approval. Evidence for the use of
methylphenidate consists of 1
multisite study of 165 children83 and
10 other smaller, single-site studies
ranging from 11 to 59 children, for
a total of 269 children.129 Seven of the
10 single-site studies revealed efﬁcacy
for methylphenidate in preschoolers.
Therefore, although there is moderate
evidence that methylphenidate is safe
and effective in preschool-aged
children, its use in this age group
remains on an “off-label” basis.
With these caveats in mind, before
initiating treatment with medication,
the clinician should assess the severity
of the child’s ADHD. Given current
data, only preschool-aged children
with ADHD and moderate-to-severe
dysfunction should be considered for
medication. Severity criteria are
symptoms that have persisted for at
least 9 months; dysfunction that is
manifested in both home and other
settings, such as preschool or child
care; and dysfunction that has not
responded adequately to PTBM.83
The decision to consider initiating
medication at this age depends, in
part, on the clinician’s assessment
of the estimated developmental
impairment, safety risks, and potential
consequences if medications are not
initiated. Other considerations affecting
the treatment of preschool-aged
children with stimulant medications
include the lack of information and
experience about their longer-term
effects on growth and brain
development, as well as the potential
for other adverse effects in this
population. It may be helpful to obtain
consultation from a mental health
specialist with speciﬁc experience with
preschool-aged children, if possible.
Evidence suggests that the rate of
metabolizing methylphenidate is
slower in children 4 through 5 years of
age, so they should be given a low dose
to start; the dose can be increased in
smaller increments. Maximum doses
have not been adequately studied in
preschool-aged children.83
Special Circumstances: Adolescents
(Age 12 Years to the 18th Birthday)
As noted, before beginning
medication treatment of adolescents
with newly diagnosed ADHD,
clinicians should assess the patient
for symptoms of substance use. If
active substance use is identiﬁed, the
clinician should refer the patient to
a subspecialist for consultative
support and guidance.2,1302134
In addition, diversion of ADHD
medication (ie, its use for something
other than its intended medical
purposes) is a special concern among
adolescents.135 Clinicians should
monitor the adolescent’s symptoms and
prescription reﬁll requests for signs of
misuse or diversion of ADHD
medication, including by parents,
classmates, or other acquaintances of
the adolescent. The majority of states
now require prescriber participation in
prescription drug monitoring programs,
which can be helpful in identifying and
preventing diversion activities. They
may consider prescribing nonstimulant
medications that minimize abuse
potential, such as atomoxetine and
extended-release guanfacine or
extended-release clonidine.
Given the risks of driving for
adolescents with ADHD, including
crashes and motor vehicle violations,
special concern should be taken to
provide medication coverage for
symptom control while
driving.79,136,137 Longer-acting or late-
afternoon, short-acting medications
may be helpful in this regard.138
Special Circumstances: Inattention
or Hyperactivity/Impulsivity (Problem
Level)
Medication is not appropriate for
children whose symptoms do not
meet DSM-5 criteria for ADHD.
Psychosocial treatments may be
appropriate for these children and
adolescents. As noted, psychosocial
treatments do not require a speciﬁc
diagnosis of ADHD, and many of the
studies on the efﬁcacy of PTBM
included children who did not have
a speciﬁc psychiatric or ADHD
diagnosis.
Combination Treatments
Studies indicate that behavioral
therapy has positive effects when it is
combined with medication for pre-
adolescent children.139 (The
combined effects of training
interventions and medication have
not been studied.)
In the MTA study, researchers found
that although the combination of
behavioral therapy and stimulant
medication was not signiﬁcantly more
effective than treatment with
medication alone for ADHD’s core
symptoms, after correcting for
multiple tests in the primary
analysis,139 a secondary analysis of
a combined measure of parent and
teacher ratings of ADHD symptoms
did ﬁnd a signiﬁcant advantage for
the combination, with a small effect of
d = 0.28.140 The combined treatment
also offered greater improvements on
academic and conduct measures,
compared to medication alone, when
the ADHD was comorbid with anxiety
and the child or adolescent lived in
a lower socioeconomic environment.
PEDIATRICS Volume 144, number 4, October 2019
15
Downloaded from publications.​aap.​org/​pediatrics/​article-pdf/​144/​4/​e20192528/​1443490/​peds_20192528.​pdf
by guest
[/PAGE 15]

[PAGE 16]
In addition, parents and teachers of
children who received combined
therapy reported that they were
signiﬁcantly more satisﬁed with the
treatment plan. Finally, the combination
of medication management and
behavioral therapy allowed for the use
of lower stimulant dosages, possibly
reducing the risk of adverse effects.141
School Programming and Supports
Encouraging strong family-school
partnerships helps the ADHD
management process.142 Psychosocial
treatments that include coordinating
efforts at school and home may
enhance the effects.
Children and adolescents with ADHD
may be eligible for services as part of
a 504 Rehabilitation Act Plan (504
plan) or special education IEP under
the “other health impairment”
designation in the Individuals with
Disability Education Act (IDEA).143
(ADHD qualiﬁes as a disability under
a 504 plan. It does not qualify under
an IEP unless its severity impairs the
child’s ability to learn. See the PoCA
for more details.) It is helpful for
clinicians to be aware of the eligibility
criteria in their states and school
districts to advise families of their
options. Eligibility decisions can vary
considerably between school
districts, and school professionals’
independent determinations might
not agree with the recommendations
of outside clinicians.
There are essentially 2 categories of
school-based services for students
with ADHD. The ﬁrst category
includes interventions that are
intended to help the student
independently meet age-appropriate
academic and behavioral
expectations. Examples of these
interventions include daily report
cards, training interventions, point
systems, and academic remediation of
skills. If successful, the student’s
impairment will resolve, and the
student will no longer need services.
The second category is intended to
provide changes in the student’s
program so his or her ADHD-related
problems no longer result in failure and
cause distress to parents, teachers, and
the student.144 These services are
referred to as “accommodations” and
include extended time to complete tests
and assignments, reduced homework
demands, the ability to keep study
materials in class, and provision of the
teacher’s notes to the student. These
services are intended to allow the
student to accomplish his work
successfully and communicate that the
student’s impairment is acceptable.
Accommodations make the student’s
impairment acceptable and are separate
from interventions aimed at improving
the students’ skills or behaviors. In the
absence of such interventions, long-
term accommodations may lead to
reduced expectations and can lead to
the need for accommodations to be
maintained throughout the student’s
education.
Encouraging strong family-school
partnerships helps the ADHD
management process, and addressing
social determinants of health is
essential to these partnerships.145,146
Psychosocial treatments that include
coordinating efforts at school and
home may enhance the effects.
KAS 6
The PCC should titrate doses of
medication for ADHD to achieve
maximum beneﬁt with tolerable side
effects (Table 9). (Grade B: strong
recommendation.)
The MTA study is the landmark study
comparing effects of methylphenidate
and behavioral treatments in children
with ADHD. Investigators compared
treatment effects in 4 groups of
children who received optimal
medication management, optimal
behavioral management, combined
medication and behavioral
management, or community treatment.
Children in the optimal medication
management and combined medication
and behavioral management groups
underwent a systematic trial with 4
different doses of methylphenidate, with
results suggesting that when this full
range of doses is administered, more
than 70% of children and adolescents
with ADHD are methylphenidate
responders.140
Authors of other reports suggest that
more than 90% of patients will have
a beneﬁcial response to 1 of the
psychostimulants if a range of
medications from both the
methylphenidate and amphetamine
and/or dextroamphetamine classes
TABLE 9 KAS 6: The PCC should titrate doses of medication for ADHD to achieve maximum beneﬁt with tolerable side effects. (Grade B: strong
recommendation.)
Aggregate evidence
quality
Grade B
Beneﬁts
The optimal dose of medication is required to reduce core symptoms to, or close to, the levels of children without ADHD.
Risks, harm, cost
Higher levels of medication increase the chances of side effects.
Beneﬁt-harm
assessment
The importance of adequately treating ADHD outweighs the risk of adverse effects.
Intentional vagueness
None.
Role of patient
preferences
The families’ preferences and comfort need to be taken into consideration in developing a titration plan, as they are likely to predict
engagement and persistence with a treatment.
Exclusions
None
Strength
Strong recommendation
Key references
Jensen et al140; Solanto147; Brinkman et al149
16
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from publications.​aap.​org/​pediatrics/​article-pdf/​144/​4/​e20192528/​1443490/​peds_20192528.​pdf
by guest
[/PAGE 16]

[PAGE 17]
are tried.147 Of note, children in the
MTA study who received care in the
community as usual, either from
a clinician they chose or to whom
their family had access, showed less
beneﬁcial results compared with
children who received optimal
medication management. The
explanation offered by the study
investigators was that the community
treatment group received lower
medication doses and less frequent
monitoring than the optimal
medication management group.
A child’s response to stimulants is
variable and unpredictable. For this
reason, it is recommended to titrate
from a low dose to one that achieves
a maximum, optimal effect in controlling
symptoms without adverse effects.
Calculating the dose on the basis of
milligrams per kilogram has not usually
been helpful because variations in dose
have not been found to be related to
height or weight. In addition, because
stimulant medication effects are seen
rapidly, titration can be accomplished in
a relatively short time period. Stimulant
medications can be effectively titrated
on a 7-day basis, but in urgent
situations, they may be effectively
titrated in as few as 3 days.140
Parent and child and adolescent
education is an important component
in the chronic illness model to ensure
cooperation in efforts to achieve
appropriate titration, remembering
that the parents themselves may be
signiﬁcantly challenged by
ADHD.148,149 The PCC should alert
parents and children that changing
medication dose and occasionally
changing a medication may be
necessary for optimal medication
management, may require a few
months to achieve optimal success,
and that medication efﬁcacy should
be monitored at regular intervals.
By the 3-year (ie, 36-month) follow-up
to the MTA interventions, there were
no differences among the 4 groups (ie,
optimal medications management,
optimal behavioral management,
a combination of medication and
behavioral management, and
community treatment). This
equivalence in poststudy outcomes
may, however, have been attributable
to convergence in ongoing treatments
received for the 4 groups. After the
initial 14-month intervention, the
children no longer received the careful
monthly monitoring provided by the
study and went back to receiving care
from their community providers;
therefore, they all effectively received
a level of ongoing care consistent with
the “community treatment” study arm
of the study. After leaving the MTA
trial, medications and doses varied for
the children who had been in the
optimal medication management or
combined medication and behavioral
management groups, and a number
stopped taking ADHD medication. On
the other hand, some children who
had been in the optimal behavioral
management group started taking
medication after leaving the trial. The
results further emphasize the need to
treat ADHD as a chronic illness and
provide continuity of care and, where
possible, provide a medical home.140
See the PoCA for more on
implementation of this KAS.
KAS 7
The PCC, if trained or experienced in
diagnosing comorbid conditions, may
initiate treatment of such conditions
or make a referral to an appropriate
subspecialist for treatment. After
detecting possible comorbid
conditions, if the PCC is not trained or
experienced in making the diagnosis
or initiating treatment, the patient
should be referred to an appropriate
subspecialist to make the diagnosis
and initiate treatment (Table 10).
(Grade C: recommendation.)
The effect of comorbid conditions on
ADHD treatment is variable. In some
cases, treatment of the ADHD may
resolve the comorbid condition. For
example, treatment of ADHD may
lead to improvement in coexisting
aggression and/or oppositional
deﬁant, depressive, or anxiety
symptoms.150,151
Sometimes, however, the comorbid
condition may require treatment in
addition to the ADHD treatment. If the
PCC is conﬁdent of his or her ability to
diagnose and treat certain comorbid
conditions, the PCC may do so. The
PCC may beneﬁt from additional
consultative support and guidance
from a mental health subspecialist or
may need to refer a child with ADHD
and comorbid conditions, such as
severe mood or anxiety disorders, to
subspecialists for assessment and
management. The subspecialists could
include child and adolescent
psychiatrists, clinical child
psychologists, developmental-
behavioral pediatricians,
neurodevelopmental disability
physicians, child neurologists, or
child- or school-based evaluation
teams.
IMPLEMENTATION: PREPARING THE
PRACTICE
It is generally the role of the primary
care pediatrician to manage mild-to-
moderate ADHD, anxiety, depression,
and substance use. The AAP
statement “The Future of Pediatrics:
Mental Health Competencies for
Pediatric Primary Care” describes the
competencies needed in both
pediatric primary and specialty care
to address the social-emotional and
mental health needs of children and
families.152 Broadly, these include
incorporating mental health content
and tools into health promotion,
prevention, and primary care
intervention, becoming
knowledgeable about use of
evidence-based treatments, and
participating as a team member and
comanaging with pediatric and
mental health specialists.
The recommendations made in this
guideline are intended to be integrated
with the broader mental health
algorithm developed as part of the AAP
Mental Health Initiatives.2,133,153
Pediatricians have unique opportunities
PEDIATRICS Volume 144, number 4, October 2019
17
Downloaded from publications.​aap.​org/​pediatrics/​article-pdf/​144/​4/​e20192528/​1443490/​peds_20192528.​pdf
by guest
[/PAGE 17]

[PAGE 18]
to identify conditions, including ADHD,
intervene early, and partner with both
families and specialists for the beneﬁt
of children’s health. A wealth of useful
information is available at the AAP
Mental Health Initiatives Web site
(https://www.aap.org/en-us/advocacy-
and-policy/aap-health-initiatives/
Mental-Health/Pages/Tips-For-
Pediatricians.aspx).
It is also important for PCCs to be
aware of health disparities and social
determinants that may impact patient
outcomes and strive to provide
culturally appropriate care to all
children and adolescents in their
practice.145,146,154,155
The accompanying PoCA provides
supplemental information to support
PCCs as they implement this
guideline’s recommendations. In
particular, the PoCA describes steps
for preparing the practice that provide
useful recommendations to clinicians.
For example, the PoCA includes
information about using standardized
rating scales to diagnose ADHD,
assessing for comorbid conditions,
documenting all aspects of the
diagnostic and treatment procedures
in the patient’s records, monitoring
the patient’s treatment and outcomes,
and providing families with written
management plans.
The AAP acknowledges that some
PCCs may not have the training,
experience, or resources to diagnose
and treat children and adolescents
with ADHD, especially if severity or
comorbid conditions make these
patients complex to manage. In these
situations, comanagement with
specialty clinicians is recommended.
The SDBP is developing a guideline to
address such complex cases and aid
pediatricians and other PCCs to
manage these cases; the SDBP
currently expects to publish this
document in 2019.67
AREAS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH
There is a need to conduct research
on topics pertinent to the diagnosis
and treatment of ADHD,
developmental variations, and
problems in children and adolescents
in primary care. These research
opportunities include the following:
• assessment of ADHD and its
common comorbidities: anxiety,
depression, learning disabilities,
and autism spectrum disorder;
• identiﬁcation and/or development
of reliable instruments suitable for
use in primary care to assess the
nature or degree of functional
impairment in children and
adolescents with ADHD and to
monitor improvement over time;
• reﬁnement of developmentally
informed assessment procedures
for evaluating ADHD in
preschoolers;
• study of medications and other
therapies used clinically but not
FDA approved for ADHD;
• determination of the optimal
schedule for monitoring children
and adolescents with ADHD,
including factors for adjusting
that schedule according to age,
symptom severity, and progress
reports;
• evaluation of the effectiveness and
adverse effects of medications used
in combination, such as a stimulant
with an a-adrenergic agent,
selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitor, or atomoxetine;
• evaluation of processes of care to
assist PCCs to identify and treat
comorbid conditions;
• evaluation of the effectiveness of
various school-based interventions;
• comparisons of medication use
and effectiveness in different
ages, including both harms and
beneﬁts;
• development of methods to involve
parents, children, and adolescents
in their own care and improve
adherence to both psychosocial and
medication treatments;
• conducting research into
psychosocial treatments, such as
cognitive behavioral therapy and
cognitive training, among others;
TABLE 10 KAS 7: The PCC, if trained or experienced in diagnosing comorbid conditions, may initiate treatment of such conditions or make a referral to an
appropriate subspecialist for treatment. After detecting possible comorbid conditions, if the PCC is not trained or experienced in making the
diagnosis or initiating treatment, the patient should be referred to an appropriate subspecialist to make the diagnosis and initiate treatment.
(Grade C: recommendation.)
Aggregate evidence
quality
Grade C
Beneﬁts
Clinicians are most effective when they know the limits of their practice to diagnose comorbid conditions and are aware of resources
in their community.
Risks, harm, cost
Under-identiﬁcation or inappropriate identiﬁcation of comorbidities can lead to inadequate or inappropriate treatments.
Beneﬁt-harm
assessment
The importance of adequately identifying and addressing comorbidities outweighs the risk of inappropriate referrals or treatments.
Intentional vagueness
None.
Role of patient
preferences
The families’ preferences and comfort need to be taken into consideration in identifying and treating or referring their patients with
comorbidities, as they are likely to predict engagement and persistence with a treatment.
Exclusions
None.
Strength
Recommendation.
Key references
Pliszka et al150; Pringsheim et al151
18
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from publications.​aap.​org/​pediatrics/​article-pdf/​144/​4/​e20192528/​1443490/​peds_20192528.​pdf
by guest
[/PAGE 18]

[PAGE 19]
• development of standardized and
documented tools to help primary
care providers identify comorbid
conditions;
• development of effective electronic
and Web-based systems to help
gather information to diagnose and
monitor children and adolescents
with ADHD;
• improvements to systems for
communicating with schools,
mental health professionals, and
other community agencies to
provide effective collaborative care;
• development of more objective
measures of performance to more
objectively monitor aspects of
severity, disability, or impairment;
• assessment of long-term outcomes
for children in whom ADHD was
ﬁrst diagnosed at preschool ages;
and
• identiﬁcation and implementation
of ideas to address the barriers
that hamper the implementation
of these guidelines and the
PoCA.
CONCLUSIONS
Evidence is clear with regard to the
legitimacy of the diagnosis of ADHD
and the appropriate diagnostic
criteria and procedures required to
establish a diagnosis, identify
comorbid conditions, and effectively
treat with both psychosocial and
pharmacologic interventions. The
steps required to sustain appropriate
treatments and achieve successful
long-term outcomes remain
challenging, however.
As noted, this clinical practice
guideline is supported by 2
accompanying documents available in
the Supplemental Information: the
PoCA and the article on systemic
barriers to the car of children and
adolescents with ADHD. Full
implementation of the guideline’s
KASs, the PoCA, and the
recommendations to address barriers
to care may require changes in ofﬁce
procedures and the identiﬁcation of
community resources. Fully
addressing systemic barriers requires
identifying local, state, and national
entities with which to partner to
advance solutions and manifest
change.156
SUBCOMMITTEE ON CHILDREN AND
ADOLESCENTS WITH ADHD (OVERSIGHT BY
THE COUNCIL ON QUALITY IMPROVEMENT
AND PATIENT SAFETY)
Mark L. Wolraich, MD, FAAP, Chairperson,
Section on Developmental Behavioral
Pediatrics
Joseph F. Hagan Jr, MD, FAAP, Vice
Chairperson, Section on Developmental
Behavioral Pediatrics
Carla Allan, PhD, Society of Pediatric
Psychology
Eugenia Chan, MD, MPH, FAAP,
Implementation Scientist
Dale Davison, MSpEd, PCC, Parent Advocate,
Children and Adolescents with Attention-
Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder
Marian Earls, MD, MTS, FAAP, Mental Health
Leadership Work Group
Steven W. Evans, PhD, Clinical Psychologist
Tanya Froehlich, MD, FAAP, Section on
Developmental Behavioral Pediatrics/Society
for Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics
Jennifer Frost, MD, FAAFP, American
Academy of Family Physicians
Joseph R. Holbrook, PhD, MPH,
Epidemiologist, Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention
Herschel Robert Lessin, MD, FAAP, Section
on Administration and Practice Management
Karen L. Pierce, MD, DFAACAP, American
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
Christoph Ulrich Lehmann, MD, FAAP,
Partnership for Policy Implementation
Jonathan D. Winner, MD, FAAP, Committee
on Practice and Ambulatory Medicine
William Zurhellen, MD, FAAP, Section on
Administration and Practice Management
STAFF
Kymika Okechukwu, MPA, Senior Manager,
Evidence-Based Medicine Initiatives
Jeremiah Salmon, MPH, Program Manager,
Policy Dissemination and Implementation
CONSULTANT
Susan K. Flinn, MA, Medical Editor
ABBREVIATIONS
AAP: American Academy of Pediatrics
ADHD: attention-deﬁcit/
hyperactivity disorder
ADHD/C: attention-deﬁcit/
hyperactivity disorder
combined presentation
ADHD/HI: attention-deﬁcit/
hyperactivity disorder
primarily of the
hyperactive-impulsive
presentation
ADHD/I: attention-deﬁcit/
hyperactivity disorder
primarily of the
inattentive presentation
AHRQ: Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality
BP: blood pressure
CHADD: Children and Adults with
Attention-Deﬁcit/
Hyperactivity Disorder
DSM-5: Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders,
Fifth Edition
DSM-IV: Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders
Fourth Edition
DSM-PC: Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual for Primary Care
ECG: electrocardiogram
eTNS: external trigeminal nerve
stimulation
FDA: US Food and Drug
Administration
HR: heart rate
IDEA: Individuals with Disability
Education Act
IEP: Individualized Education
Program
KAS: key action statement
MTA: The Multimodal Treatment
of Attention Deﬁcit
Hyperactivity Disorder
PCC: primary care clinician
PoCA: process of care algorithm
PTBM: parent training in behavior
management
SDBP: Society for Developmental
and Behavioral Pediatrics
PEDIATRICS Volume 144, number 4, October 2019
19
Downloaded from publications.​aap.​org/​pediatrics/​article-pdf/​144/​4/​e20192528/​1443490/​peds_20192528.​pdf
by guest
[/PAGE 19]

[PAGE 20]
vAmerican Academy of Pediatrics, Itasca, Illinois; wAmerican Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Washington, District of Columbia; xFeinberg School of
Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois; yAtlanta, Georgia; and zHolderness, New Hampshire
The guidance in this report does not indicate an exclusive course of treatment or serve as a standard of medical care. Variations, taking into account individual
circumstances, may be appropriate.
All clinical practice guidelines from the American Academy of Pediatrics automatically expire 5 years after publication unless reafﬁrmed, revised, or retired at or
before that time.
The ﬁndings and conclusions in this report are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the ofﬁcial position of the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. Dr Holbrook was not an author of the accompanying supplemental section on barriers to care.
This document is copyrighted and is property of the American Academy of Pediatrics and its Board of Directors. All authors have ﬁled conﬂict of interest statements
with the American Academy of Pediatrics. Any conﬂicts have been resolved through a process approved by the Board of Directors. The American Academy of
Pediatrics has neither solicited nor accepted any commercial involvement in the development of the content of this publication.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2019-2528
Address correspondence to Mark L. Wolraich, MD, FAAP. Email: mark-wolraich@ouhsc.edu
PEDIATRICS (ISSN Numbers: Print, 0031-4005; Online, 1098-4275).
Copyright © 2019 by the American Academy of Pediatrics
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE: The authors have indicated they have no ﬁnancial relationships relevant to this article to disclose.
FUNDING: No external funding.
POTENTIAL CONFLICT OF INTEREST: All authors have ﬁled conﬂict of interest statements with the American Academy of Pediatrics. Any conﬂicts have been resolved
through a process approved by the American Academy of Pediatrics board of directors. Dr Allan reports a relationship with ADDitude Magazine; Dr Chan reports
relationships with TriVox Health and Wolters Kluwer; Dr Lehmann reports relationships with International Medical Informatics Association, Springer Publishing, and
Thieme Publishing Group; Dr Wolraich reports a Continuing Medical Education trainings relationship with the Resource for Advancing Children’s Health Institute; the
other authors have indicated they have no potential conﬂicts of interest to disclose.
REFERENCES
1. American Academy of Pediatrics.
Subcommittee on Attention-Deﬁcit/
Hyperactivity Disorder, Steering
Committee on Quality Improvement and
Management. ADHD: Clinical guideline for
the diagnosis, evaluation, and treatment
of attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder
in children and adolescents. Pediatrics.
2011;128(5):1007–1022
2. American Academy of Pediatrics Task
Force on Mental Health. Addressing
Mental Health Concerns in Primary
Care: A Clinician’s Toolkit [CD-ROM]. Elk
Grove Village, IL: American Academy of
Pediatrics; 2010
3. Pastor PN, Reuben CA. Racial and
ethnic differences in ADHD and LD in
young school-age children: parental
reports in the National Health
Interview Survey. Public Health Rep.
2005;120(4):383–392
4. US Department of Health and Human
Services; Health Resources and
Services Administration. Designated
health professional shortage areas
statistics: designated HPSA quarterly
summary. Rockville, MD: Health
Resources and Services
Administration; 2018
5. Pelech D, Hayford T. Medicare
advantage and commercial prices for
mental health services. Health Aff
(Millwood). 2019;38(2):262–267
6. Melek SP, Perlman D, Davenport S.
Differential Reimbursement of
Psychiatric Services by Psychiatrists
and Other Medical Providers. Seattle,
WA: Milliman;2017
7. Holbrook JR, Bitsko RH, Danielson ML,
Visser SN. Interpreting the prevalence
of mental disorders in children:
tribulation and triangulation. Health
Promot Pract. 2017;18(1):5–7
8. Thomas R, Sanders S, Doust J, Beller E,
Glasziou P. Prevalence of attention-
deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder:
a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Pediatrics. 2015;135(4).
Available at: www.pediatrics.org/cgi/
content/full/135/4/e994
9. Wolraich ML, McKeown RE, Visser SN,
et al. The prevalence of ADHD: its
diagnosis and treatment in four
school districts across two states.
J Atten Disord. 2014;18(7):563–575
10. Rowland AS, Skipper BJ, Umbach DM,
et al. The prevalence of ADHD in
a population-based sample. J Atten
Disord. 2015;19(9):741–754
11. Danielson ML, Bitsko RH, Ghandour RM,
Holbrook JR, Kogan MD, Blumberg SJ.
Prevalence of parent-reported ADHD
diagnosis and associated treatment
among U.S. children and adolescents,
2016. J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. 2018;
47(2):199–212
12. Visser SN, Zablotsky B, Holbrook JR,
et al. National Health Statistics Reports,
No 81: Diagnostic Experiences of Children
with Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity
Disorder. Hyattsville, MD: National Center
for Health Statistics; 2015
13. Molina BS, Hinshaw SP, Swanson JM,
et al; MTA Cooperative Group. The MTA
at 8 years: prospective follow-up of
children treated for combined-type ADHD
in a multisite study. J Am Acad Child
Adolesc Psychiatry. 2009;48(5):484–500
14. Holbrook JR, Cuffe SP, Cai B, et al.
Persistence of parent-reported ADHD
symptoms from childhood through
adolescence in a community sample.
J Atten Disord. 2016;20(1):11–20
20
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from publications.​aap.​org/​pediatrics/​article-pdf/​144/​4/​e20192528/​1443490/​peds_20192528.​pdf
by guest
[/PAGE 20]

[PAGE 21]
15. Mueller KL, Tomblin JB. Examining the
comorbidity of language disorders and
ADHD. Top Lang Disord. 2012;32(3):
228–246
16. Pastor PN, Reuben CA, Duran CR,
Hawkins LD. Association Between
Diagnosed ADHD and Selected
Characteristics Among Children Aged
4–17 Years: United States, 2011–2013.
NCHS Data Brief, No. 201. Hyattsville,
MD: National Center for Health
Statistics; 2015
17. Elia J, Ambrosini P, Berrettini W. ADHD
characteristics: I. Concurrent co-
morbidity patterns in children &
adolescents. Child Adolesc Psychiatry
Ment Health. 2008;2(1):15
18. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC). Mental health in the
United States. Prevalence of diagnosis
and medication treatment for attention-
deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder--United
States, 2003. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly
Rep. 2005;54(34):842–847
19. Cuffe SP, Visser SN, Holbrook JR, et al.
ADHD and psychiatric comorbidity:
functional outcomes in a school-based
sample of children [published online
ahead of print November 25, 2015].
J Atten Disord. doi:10.1177/
1087054715613437
20. Gaub M, Carlson CL. Gender differences
in ADHD: a meta-analysis and critical
review. J Am Acad Child Adolesc
Psychiatry. 1997;36(8):1036–1045
21. Tung I, Li JJ, Meza JI, et al. Patterns of
comorbidity among girls with ADHD:
a meta-analysis. Pediatrics. 2016;138(4):
e20160430
22. Layton TJ, Barnett ML, Hicks TR, Jena
AB. Attention deﬁcit-hyperactivity
disorder and month of school
enrollment. N Engl J Med. 2018;379(22):
2122–2130
23. Kemper AR, Maslow GR, Hill S, et al.
Attention Deﬁcit Hyperactivity Disorder:
Diagnosis and Treatment in Children
and Adolescents. Comparative
Effectiveness Reviews, No. 203.
Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality; 2018
24. Pelham WE Jr, Wheeler T, Chronis A.
Empirically supported psychosocial
treatments for attention deﬁcit
hyperactivity disorder. J Clin Child
Psychol. 1998;27(2):190–205
25. Evans SW, Owens JS, Wymbs BT, Ray AR.
Evidence-based psychosocial
treatments for children and
adolescents with attention deﬁcit/
hyperactivity disorder. J Clin Child
Adolesc Psychol. 2018;47(2):157–198
26. Pelham WE Jr, Fabiano GA. Evidence-
based psychosocial treatments for
attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder.
J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. 2008;37(1):
184–214
27. American Academy of Pediatrics
Steering Committee on Quality
Improvement and Management.
Classifying recommendations for
clinical practice guidelines. Pediatrics.
2004;114(3):874–877
28. Visser SN, Lesesne CA, Perou R. National
estimates and factors associated with
medication treatment for childhood
attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder.
Pediatrics. 2007;119(suppl 1):S99–S106
29. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC). Increasing
prevalence of parent-reported
attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder
among children–United States, 2003
and 2007. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly
Rep. 2010;59(44):1439–1443
30. Egger HL, Kondo D, Angold A. The
epidemiology and diagnostic issues in
preschool attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity
disorder: a review. Infants Young Child.
2006;19(2):109–122
31. Wolraich ML, Wibbelsman CJ, Brown TE,
et al. Attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity
disorder among adolescents: a review
of the diagnosis, treatment, and clinical
implications. Pediatrics. 2005;115(6):
1734–1746
32. American Psychiatric Association.
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders (DSM-5). 5th ed.
Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric
Association; 2013
33. Lahey BB, Pelham WE, Stein MA, et al.
Validity of DSM-IV attention-deﬁcit/
hyperactivity disorder for younger
children. J Am Acad Child Adolesc
Psychiatry. 1998;37(7):695–702
34. Pavuluri MN, Luk SL, McGee R. Parent
reported preschool attention deﬁcit
hyperactivity: measurement and
validity. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry.
1999;8(2):126–133
35. Harvey EA, Youngwirth SD, Thakar DA,
Errazuriz PA. Predicting attention-
deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder and
oppositional deﬁant disorder from
preschool diagnostic assessments.
J Consult Clin Psychol. 2009;77(2):
349–354
36. Keenan K, Wakschlag LS. More than the
terrible twos: the nature and severity of
behavior problems in clinic-referred
preschool children. J Abnorm Child
Psychol. 2000;28(1):33–46
37. Gadow KD, Nolan EE, Litcher L, et al.
Comparison of attention-deﬁcit/
hyperactivity disorder symptom
subtypes in Ukrainian schoolchildren.
J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry.
2000;39(12):1520–1527
38. Sprafkin J, Volpe RJ, Gadow KD, Nolan
EE, Kelly K. A DSM-IV-referenced
screening instrument for preschool
children: the Early Childhood Inventory-
4. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry.
2002;41(5):604–612
39. Poblano A, Romero E. ECI-4 screening of
attention deﬁcit-hyperactivity disorder
and co-morbidity in Mexican preschool
children: preliminary results. Arq
Neuropsiquiatr. 2006;64(4):932–936
40. American Academy of Pediatrics.
Mental Health Screening and
Assessment Tools for Primary Care. Elk
Grove Village, IL: American Academy of
Pediatrics; 2012. Available at: https://
www.aap.org/en-us/advocacy-and-
policy/aap-health-initiatives/Mental-
Health/Documents/MH_ScreeningChart.
pdf. Accessed September 8, 2019
41. DuPaul GJ, Power TJ, Anastopoulos AD,
Reid R. ADHD Rating Scale – 5 for
Children and Adolescents: Checklists,
Norms, and Clinical Interpretation. 2nd
ed. New York, NY: Guilford Press; 2016
42. McGoey KE, DuPaul GJ, Haley E, Shelton
TL. Parent and teacher ratings of
attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder
in preschool: the ADHD rating scale-IV
preschool version. J Psychopathol
Behav Assess. 2007;29(4):269–276
43. Young J. Common comorbidities seen in
adolescents with attention-deﬁcit/
hyperactivity disorder. Adolesc Med
State Art Rev. 2008;19(2):216–228, vii
44. Freeman RD; Tourette Syndrome
International Database Consortium. Tic
disorders and ADHD: answers from
PEDIATRICS Volume 144, number 4, October 2019
21
Downloaded from publications.​aap.​org/​pediatrics/​article-pdf/​144/​4/​e20192528/​1443490/​peds_20192528.​pdf
by guest
[/PAGE 21]

[PAGE 22]
a world-wide clinical dataset on
Tourette syndrome. Eur Child Adolesc
Psychiatry. 2007;16(suppl 1):15–23
45. Riggs PD. Clinical approach to
treatment of ADHD in adolescents with
substance use disorders and conduct
disorder. J Am Acad Child Adolesc
Psychiatry. 1998;37(3):331–332
46. Sibley MH, Pelham WE, Molina BSG,
et al. Diagnosing ADHD in adolescence.
J Consult Clin Psychol. 2012;80(1):
139–150
47. Kratochvil CJ, Vaughan BS, Stoner JA,
et al. A double-blind, placebo-controlled
study of atomoxetine in young children
with ADHD. Pediatrics. 2011;127(4).
Available at: www.pediatrics.org/cgi/
content/full/127/4/e862
48. Harrison AG, Edwards MJ, Parker KC.
Identifying students faking ADHD:
preliminary ﬁndings and strategies for
detection. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. 2007;
22(5):577–588
49. Wolraich ML, Felice ME, Drotar DD. The
Classiﬁcation of Child and Adolescent
Mental Conditions in Primary Care:
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual for
Primary Care (DSM-PC), Child and
Adolescent Version. Elk Grove Village, IL:
American Academy of Pediatrics; 1996
50. Rowland AS, Lesesne CA, Abramowitz
AJ. The epidemiology of attention-
deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD):
a public health view. Ment Retard Dev
Disabil Res Rev. 2002;8(3):162–170
51. Cuffe SP, Moore CG, McKeown RE.
Prevalence and correlates of ADHD
symptoms in the national health
interview survey. J Atten Disord. 2005;
9(2):392–401
52. Pastor PN, Reuben CA. Diagnosed
attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder
and learning disability: United States,
2004-2006. Vital Health Stat 10. 2008;
10(237):1–14
53. Biederman J, Faraone SV, Wozniak J,
Mick E, Kwon A, Aleardi M. Further
evidence of unique developmental
phenotypic correlates of pediatric
bipolar disorder: ﬁndings from a large
sample of clinically referred
preadolescent children assessed over
the last 7 years. J Affect Disord. 2004;
82(suppl 1):S45–S58
54. Biederman J, Kwon A, Aleardi M, et al.
Absence of gender effects on attention
deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder: ﬁndings
in nonreferred subjects. Am
J Psychiatry. 2005;162(6):1083–1089
55. Biederman J, Ball SW, Monuteaux MC,
et al. New insights into the comorbidity
between ADHD and major depression in
adolescent and young adult females.
J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry.
2008;47(4):426–434
56. Biederman J, Melmed RD, Patel A,
McBurnett K, Donahue J, Lyne A. Long-
term, open-label extension study of
guanfacine extended release in
children and adolescents with ADHD.
CNS Spectr. 2008;13(12):1047–1055
57. Crabtree VM, Ivanenko A, Gozal D.
Clinical and parental assessment of
sleep in children with attention-deﬁcit/
hyperactivity disorder referred to
a pediatric sleep medicine center. Clin
Pediatr (Phila). 2003;42(9):807–813
58. LeBourgeois MK, Avis K, Mixon M, Olmi J,
Harsh J. Snoring, sleep quality, and
sleepiness across attention-deﬁcit/
hyperactivity disorder subtypes. Sleep.
2004;27(3):520–525
59. Chan E, Zhan C, Homer CJ. Health care
use and costs for children with
attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder:
national estimates from the Medical
Expenditure Panel Survey. Arch Pediatr
Adolesc Med. 2002;156(5):504–511
60. Newcorn JH, Miller SR, Ivanova I, et al.
Adolescent outcome of ADHD: impact of
childhood conduct and anxiety
disorders. CNS Spectr. 2004;9(9):
668–678
61. Sung V, Hiscock H, Sciberras E, Efron D.
Sleep problems in children with
attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder:
prevalence and the effect on the child
and family. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med.
2008;162(4):336–342
62. Froehlich TE, Fogler J, Barbaresi WJ,
Elsayed NA, Evans SW, Chan E. Using
ADHD medications to treat coexisting
ADHD and reading disorders:
a systematic review. Clin Pharmacol
Ther. 2018;104(4):619–637
63. Rothenberger A, Roessner V. The
phenomenology of attention-deﬁcit/
hyperactivity disorder in tourette
syndrome. In: Martino D, Leckman JF,
eds. Tourette Syndrome. New York, NY:
Oxford University Press; 2013:26–49
64. Antshel KM, Zhang-James Y, Faraone SV.
The comorbidity of ADHD and autism
spectrum disorder. Expert Rev
Neurother. 2013;13(10):1117–1128
65. Mahajan R, Bernal MP, Panzer R, et al;
Autism Speaks Autism Treatment
Network Psychopharmacology
Committee. Clinical practice pathways
for evaluation and medication choice
for attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity
disorder symptoms in autism spectrum
disorders. Pediatrics. 2012;130(suppl
2):S125–S138
66. Larson K, Russ SA, Kahn RS, Halfon N.
Patterns of comorbidity, functioning,
and service use for US children with
ADHD, 2007. Pediatrics. 2011;127(3):
462–470
67. Society for Developmental and
Behavioral Pediatrics. ADHD special
interest group. Available at: www.sdbp.
org/committees/sig-adhd.cfm. Accessed
September 8, 2019
68. Medical Home Initiatives for Children
With Special Needs Project Advisory
Committee. American Academy of
Pediatrics. The medical home.
Pediatrics. 2002;110(1 pt 1):184–186
69. Brito A, Grant R, Overholt S, et al. The
enhanced medical home: the pediatric
standard of care for medically
underserved children. Adv Pediatr.
2008;55:9–28
70. Sibley MH, Swanson JM, Arnold LE, et al;
MTA Cooperative Group. Deﬁning ADHD
symptom persistence in adulthood:
optimizing sensitivity and speciﬁcity.
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2017;58(6):
655–662
71. Chang Z, D’Onofrio BM, Quinn PD,
Lichtenstein P, Larsson H. Medication
for attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity
disorder and risk for depression:
a nationwide longitudinal cohort study.
Biol Psychiatry. 2016;80(12):916–922
72. Biederman J, Monuteaux MC, Spencer T,
Wilens TE, Faraone SV. Do stimulants
protect against psychiatric disorders in
youth with ADHD? A 10-year follow-up
study. Pediatrics. 2009;124(1):71–
78
73. Barbaresi WJ, Katusic SK, Colligan RC,
Weaver AL, Jacobsen SJ. Modiﬁers of
long-term school outcomes for children
with attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity
disorder: does treatment with
22
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from publications.​aap.​org/​pediatrics/​article-pdf/​144/​4/​e20192528/​1443490/​peds_20192528.​pdf
by guest
[/PAGE 22]

[PAGE 23]
stimulant medication make
a difference? Results from a population-
based study. J Dev Behav Pediatr. 2007;
28(4):274–287
74. Schefﬂer RM, Brown TT, Fulton BD,
Hinshaw SP, Levine P, Stone S. Positive
association between attention-deﬁcit/
hyperactivity disorder medication use
and academic achievement during
elementary school. Pediatrics. 2009;
123(5):1273–1279
75. Barbaresi WJ, Colligan RC, Weaver AL,
Voigt RG, Killian JM, Katusic SK.
Mortality, ADHD, and psychosocial
adversity in adults with childhood
ADHD: a prospective study. Pediatrics.
2013;131(4):637–644
76. Chang Z, Lichtenstein P, Långström N,
Larsson H, Fazel S. Association between
prescription of major psychotropic
medications and violent reoffending
after prison release. JAMA. 2016;
316(17):1798–1807
77. Lichtenstein P, Halldner L, Zetterqvist J,
et al. Medication for attention deﬁcit-
hyperactivity disorder and criminality.
N Engl J Med. 2012;367(21):2006–2014
78. Chang Z, Quinn PD, Hur K, et al.
Association between medication use for
attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder
and risk of motor vehicle crashes.
JAMA Psychiatry. 2017;74(6):597–603
79. Chang Z, Lichtenstein P, D’Onofrio BM,
Sjölander A, Larsson H. Serious
transport accidents in adults with
attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder
and the effect of medication:
a population-based study. JAMA
Psychiatry. 2014;71(3):319–325
80. Harstad E, Levy S; Committee on
Substance Abuse. Attention-deﬁcit/
hyperactivity disorder and substance
abuse. Pediatrics. 2014;134(1). Available
at: www.pediatrics.org/cgi/content/
full/134/1/e293
81. Dalsgaard S, Leckman JF, Mortensen
PB, Nielsen HS, Simonsen M. Effect of
drugs on the risk of injuries in children
with attention deﬁcit hyperactivity
disorder: a prospective cohort study.
Lancet Psychiatry. 2015;2(8):702–709
82. Raman SR, Marshall SW, Haynes K,
Gaynes BN, Naftel AJ, Stürmer T.
Stimulant treatment and injury among
children with attention deﬁcit
hyperactivity disorder: an application of
the self-controlled case series study
design. Inj Prev. 2013;19(3):164–170
83. Greenhill L, Kollins S, Abikoff H, et al.
Efﬁcacy and safety of immediate-
release methylphenidate treatment for
preschoolers with ADHD. J Am Acad
Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2006;45(11):
1284–1293
84. Children and Adults with Attention-
Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder. CHADD.
Available at: www.chadd.org. Accessed
September 8, 2019
85. Sonuga-Barke EJ, Daley D, Thompson M,
Laver-Bradbury C, Weeks A. Parent-
based therapies for preschool
attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder:
a randomized, controlled trial with
a community sample. J Am Acad Child
Adolesc Psychiatry. 2001;40(4):402–408
86. Van Cleave J, Leslie LK. Approaching
ADHD as a chronic condition:
implications for long-term adherence.
J Psychosoc Nurs Ment Health Serv.
2008;46(8):28–37
87. Webster-Stratton CH, Reid MJ,
Beauchaine T. Combining parent and
child training for young children with
ADHD. J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol.
2011;40(2):191–203
88. Shepard SA, Dickstein S. Preventive
intervention for early childhood
behavioral problems: an ecological
perspective. Child Adolesc Psychiatr
Clin N Am. 2009;18(3):687–706
89. Evans SW, Langberg JM, Egan T, Molitor
SJ. Middle school-based and high
school-based interventions for
adolescents with ADHD. Child Adolesc
Psychiatr Clin N Am. 2014;23(4):699–715
90. McGough JJ, Sturm A, Cowen J, et al.
Double-blind, sham-controlled, pilot
study of trigeminal nerve stimulation
for attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity
disorder. J Am Acad Child Adolesc
Psychiatry. 2019;58(4):403–411.e3
91. Robin AL, Foster SL. The Guilford Family
Therapy Series. Negotiating
Parent–Adolescent Conﬂict: A
Behavioral–Family Systems Approach.
New York, NY: Guilford Press; 1989
92. Barkley RA, Guevremont DC,
Anastopoulos AD, Fletcher KE. A
comparison of three family therapy
programs for treating family conﬂicts
in adolescents with attention-deﬁcit
hyperactivity disorder. J Consult Clin
Psychol. 1992;60(3):450–462
93. Fabiano GA, Schatz NK, Morris KL, et al.
Efﬁcacy of a family-focused intervention
for young drivers with attention-deﬁcit
hyperactivity disorder. J Consult Clin
Psychol. 2016;84(12):1078–1093
94. Sibley MH, Graziano PA, Kuriyan AB,
et al. Parent-teen behavior therapy 1
motivational interviewing for
adolescents with ADHD. J Consult Clin
Psychol. 2016;84(8):699–712
95. Evans SW, Langberg JM, Schultz BK,
et al. Evaluation of a school-based
treatment program for young
adolescents with ADHD. J Consult Clin
Psychol. 2016;84(1):15–30
96. Langberg JM, Dvorsky MR, Molitor SJ,
et al. Overcoming the research-to-
practice gap: a randomized trial with
two brief homework and organization
interventions for students with ADHD as
implemented by school mental health
providers. J Consult Clin Psychol. 2018;
86(1):39–55
97. Schultz BK, Evans SW, Langberg JM,
Schoemann AM. Outcomes for
adolescents who comply with long-term
psychosocial treatment for ADHD.
J Consult Clin Psychol. 2017;85(3):
250–261
98. Newcorn JH, Kratochvil CJ, Allen AJ,
et al; Atomoxetine/Methylphenidate
Comparative Study Group. Atomoxetine
and osmotically released
methylphenidate for the treatment of
attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder:
acute comparison and differential
response. Am J Psychiatry. 2008;165(6):
721–730
99. Cheng JY, Chen RY, Ko JS, Ng EM.
Efﬁcacy and safety of atomoxetine for
attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder
in children and adolescents-meta-
analysis and meta-regression analysis.
Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2007;
194(2):197–209
100. Michelson D, Allen AJ, Busner J, et al.
Once-daily atomoxetine treatment for
children and adolescents with attention
deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder:
a randomized, placebo-controlled study.
Am J Psychiatry. 2002;159(11):
1896–1901
101. Biederman J, Melmed RD, Patel A, et al;
SPD503 Study Group. A randomized,
PEDIATRICS Volume 144, number 4, October 2019
23
Downloaded from publications.​aap.​org/​pediatrics/​article-pdf/​144/​4/​e20192528/​1443490/​peds_20192528.​pdf
by guest
[/PAGE 23]

[PAGE 24]
double-blind, placebo-controlled study
of guanfacine extended release in
children and adolescents with
attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder.
Pediatrics. 2008;121(1). Available at:
www.pediatrics.org/cgi/content/
full/121/1/e73
102. Sallee FR, Lyne A, Wigal T, McGough JJ.
Long-term safety and efﬁcacy of
guanfacine extended release in
children and adolescents with
attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder.
J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol. 2009;
19(3):215–226
103. Jain R, Segal S, Kollins SH, Khayrallah
M. Clonidine extended-release tablets
for pediatric patients with attention-
deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder. J Am
Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2011;
50(2):171–179
104. Brown JT, Bishop JR. Atomoxetine
pharmacogenetics: associations with
pharmacokinetics, treatment response
and tolerability. Pharmacogenomics.
2015;16(13):1513–1520
105. Kambeitz J, Romanos M, Ettinger U.
Meta-analysis of the association
between dopamine transporter
genotype and response to
methylphenidate treatment in ADHD.
Pharmacogenomics J. 2014;14(1):77–84
106. Bruxel EM, Akutagava-Martins GC,
Salatino-Oliveira A, et al. ADHD
pharmacogenetics across the life cycle:
new ﬁndings and perspectives. Am
J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet.
2014;165B(4):263–282
107. Kieling C, Genro JP, Hutz MH, Rohde LA.
A current update on ADHD
pharmacogenomics.
Pharmacogenomics. 2010;11(3):
407–419
108. Froehlich TE, McGough JJ, Stein MA.
Progress and promise of attention-
deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder
pharmacogenetics. CNS Drugs. 2010;
24(2):99–117
109. Joensen B, Meyer M, Aagaard L. Speciﬁc
genes associated with adverse events
of methylphenidate use in the pediatric
population: a systematic literature
review. J Res Pharm Pract. 2017;6(2):
65–72
110. Swanson JM, Elliott GR, Greenhill LL,
et al. Effects of stimulant medication on
growth rates across 3 years in the MTA
follow-up. J Am Acad Child Adolesc
Psychiatry. 2007;46(8):1015–1027
111. Mosholder AD, Gelperin K, Hammad TA,
Phelan K, Johann-Liang R.
Hallucinations and other psychotic
symptoms associated with the use of
attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder
drugs in children. Pediatrics. 2009;
123(2):611–616
112. Cortese S, Holtmann M, Banaschewski
T, et al; European ADHD Guidelines
Group. Practitioner review: current best
practice in the management of adverse
events during treatment with ADHD
medications in children and
adolescents. J Child Psychol Psychiatry.
2013;54(3):227–246
113. Avigan M. Review of AERS Data From
Marketed Safety Experience During
Stimulant Therapy: Death, Sudden
Death, Cardiovascular SAEs (Including
Stroke). Report No. D030403. Silver
Spring, MD: Food and Drug
Administration, Center for Drug
Evaluation and Research; 2004
114. Perrin JM, Friedman RA, Knilans TK;
Black Box Working Group; Section on
Cardiology and Cardiac Surgery.
Cardiovascular monitoring and
stimulant drugs for attention-deﬁcit/
hyperactivity disorder. Pediatrics. 2008;
122(2):451–453
115. McCarthy S, Cranswick N, Potts L, Taylor
E, Wong IC. Mortality associated with
attention-deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD) drug treatment: a retrospective
cohort study of children, adolescents
and young adults using the general
practice research database. Drug Saf.
2009;32(11):1089–1096
116. Gould MS, Walsh BT, Munfakh JL, et al.
Sudden death and use of stimulant
medications in youths. Am J Psychiatry.
2009;166(9):992–1001
117. Cooper WO, Habel LA, Sox CM, et al.
ADHD drugs and serious cardiovascular
events in children and young adults.
N Engl J Med. 2011;365(20):1896–1904
118. Schelleman H, Bilker WB, Strom BL,
et al. Cardiovascular events and death
in children exposed and unexposed to
ADHD agents. Pediatrics. 2011;127(6):
1102–1110
119. Garnock-Jones KP, Keating GM.
Atomoxetine: a review of its use in
attention-deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder
in children and adolescents. Paediatr
Drugs. 2009;11(3):203–226
120. Reed VA, Buitelaar JK, Anand E, et al.
The safety of atomoxetine for the
treatment of children and adolescents
with attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity
disorder: a comprehensive review of
over a decade of research. CNS Drugs.
2016;30(7):603–628
121. Bangs ME, Tauscher-Wisniewski S,
Polzer J, et al. Meta-analysis of suicide-
related behavior events in patients
treated with atomoxetine. J Am Acad
Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2008;47(2):
209–218
122. Bangs ME, Jin L, Zhang S, et al. Hepatic
events associated with atomoxetine
treatment for attention-deﬁcit
hyperactivity disorder. Drug Saf. 2008;
31(4):345–354
123. Spencer TJ, Kratochvil CJ, Sangal RB,
et al. Effects of atomoxetine on growth
in children with attention-deﬁcit/
hyperactivity disorder following up to
ﬁve years of treatment. J Child Adolesc
Psychopharmacol. 2007;17(5):689–700
124. Elbe D, Reddy D. Focus on guanfacine
extended-release: a review of its use in
child and adolescent psychiatry. J Can
Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2014;
23(1):48–60
125. Croxtall JD. Clonidine extended-release:
in attention-deﬁcit hyperactivity
disorder. Paediatr Drugs. 2011;13(5):
329–336
126. Vaughan B, Kratochvil CJ.
Pharmacotherapy of pediatric
attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder.
Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am. 2012;
21(4):941–955
127. Hirota T, Schwartz S, Correll CU. Alpha-2
agonists for attention-deﬁcit/
hyperactivity disorder in youth:
a systematic review and meta-analysis
of monotherapy and add-on trials to
stimulant therapy. J Am Acad Child
Adolesc Psychiatry. 2014;53(2):153–173
128. Treuer T, Gau SS, Méndez L, et al. A
systematic review of combination
therapy with stimulants and
atomoxetine for attention-deﬁcit/
hyperactivity disorder, including patient
characteristics, treatment strategies,
effectiveness, and tolerability. J Child
Adolesc Psychopharmacol. 2013;23(3):
179–193
24
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
Downloaded from publications.​aap.​org/​pediatrics/​article-pdf/​144/​4/​e20192528/​1443490/​peds_20192528.​pdf
by guest
[/PAGE 24]

[PAGE 25]
129. Greenhill LL, Posner K, Vaughan BS,
Kratochvil CJ. Attention deﬁcit
hyperactivity disorder in preschool
children. Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N
Am. 2008;17(2):347–366, ix
130. Wilens TE, Spencer TJ. Understanding
attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder
from childhood to adulthood. Postgrad
Med. 2010;122(5):97–109
131. Foy JM, ed. Psychotropic medications in
primary care. In: Mental Health Care of
Children and Adolescents: A Guide for
Primary Care Clinicians. Itasca, IL:
American Academy of Pediatrics; 2018:
315–374
132. Wilens TE, Adler LA, Adams J, et al.
Misuse and diversion of stimulants
prescribed for ADHD: a systematic
review of the literature. J Am Acad
Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2008;47(1):
21–31
133. American Academy of Pediatrics.
Mental health initiatives. Available at:
https://www.aap.org/en-us/advocacy-
and-policy/aap-health-initiatives/
Mental-Health/Pages/default.aspx.
Accessed September 8, 2019
134. Levy S, Campbell MD, Shea CL, DuPont R.
Trends in abstaining from substance
use in adolescents: 1975-2014.
Pediatrics. 2018;142(2):e20173498
135. Graff Low K, Gendaszek AE. Illicit use of
psychostimulants among college
students: a preliminary study. Psychol
Health Med. 2002;7(3):283–287
136. Barkley RA, Cox D. A review of driving
risks and impairments associated with
attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder
and the effects of stimulant medication
on driving performance. J Safety Res.
2007;38(1):113–128
137. Jerome L, Habinski L, Segal A. Attention-
deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
and driving risk: a review of the
literature and a methodological
critique. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2006;8(5):
416–426
138. Cox DJ, Merkel RL, Moore M, Thorndike
F, Muller C, Kovatchev B. Relative
beneﬁts of stimulant therapy with OROS
methylphenidate versus mixed
amphetamine salts extended release in
improving the driving performance of
adolescent drivers with attention-
deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder.
Pediatrics. 2006;118(3). Available at:
www.pediatrics.org/cgi/content/
full/118/3/e704
139. The MTA Cooperative Group; Multimodal
Treatment Study of Children with ADHD.
A 14-month randomized clinical trial of
treatment strategies for attention-
deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder. Arch Gen
Psychiatry. 1999;56(12):1073–1086
140. Jensen PS, Hinshaw SP, Swanson JM,
et al. Findings from the NIMH
Multimodal Treatment Study of ADHD
(MTA): implications and applications for
primary care providers. J Dev Behav
Pediatr. 2001;22(1):60–73
141. Pelham WE Jr, Gnagy EM. Psychosocial
and combined treatments for ADHD.
Ment Retard Dev Disabil Res Rev. 1999;
5(3):225–236
142. Homer CJ, Klatka K, Romm D, et al. A
review of the evidence for the medical
home for children with special health
care needs. Pediatrics. 2008;122(4).
Available at: www.pediatrics.org/cgi/
content/full/122/4/e922
143. Davila RR, Williams ML, MacDonald JT.
Memorandum on clariﬁcation of policy
to address the needs of children with
attention deﬁcit disorders within
general and/or special education. In:
Parker HC, ed. The ADD Hyperactivity
Handbook for Schools. Plantation, FL:
Impact Publications Inc; 1991:261–268
144. Harrison JR, Bunford N, Evans SW,
Owens JS. Educational accommodations
for students with behavioral
challenges: a systematic review of the
literature. Rev Educ Res. 2013;83(4):
551–597
145. Committee on Pediatric Workforce.
Enhancing pediatric workforce diversity
and providing culturally effective
pediatric care: implications for
practice, education, and policy making.
Pediatrics. 2013;132(4). Available at:
www.pediatrics.org/cgi/content/
full/132/4/e1105
146. Berman RS, Patel MR, Belamarich PF,
Gross RS. Screening for poverty and
poverty-related social determinants of
health. Pediatr Rev. 2018;39(5):235–246
147. Solanto MV.
Neuropsychopharmacological
mechanisms of stimulant drug action in
attention-deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder:
a review and integration. Behav Brain
Res. 1998;94(1):127–152
148. Wagner E. Chronic disease
management: what will it take to
improve care for chronic illness? Effect
Clin Pract. 1998;1(1):2–4
149. Brinkman WB, Sucharew H, Majcher JH,
Epstein JN. Predictors of medication
continuity in children with ADHD.
Pediatrics. 2018;141(6):e20172580
150. Pliszka SR, Crismon ML, Hughes CW,
et al; Texas Consensus Conference
Panel on Pharmacotherapy of
Childhood Attention Deﬁcit Hyperactivity
Disorder. The Texas Children’s
Medication Algorithm Project: revision
of the algorithm for pharmacotherapy
of attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity
disorder. J Am Acad Child Adolesc
Psychiatry. 2006;45(6):642–657
151. Pringsheim T, Hirsch L, Gardner D,
Gorman DA. The pharmacological
management of oppositional behaviour,
conduct problems, and aggression in
children and adolescents with
attention-deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder,
oppositional deﬁant disorder, and
conduct disorder: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Part 1:
psychostimulants, alpha-2 agonists, and
atomoxetine. Can J Psychiatry. 2015;
60(2):42–51
152. Committee on Psychosocial Aspects of
Child and Family Health and Task Force
on Mental Health. Policy statement--The
future of pediatrics: mental health
competencies for pediatric primary
care. Pediatrics. 2009;124(1):410–421
153. Foy JM, ed. Algorithm: a process for
integrating mental health care into
pediatric practice. In: Mental Health
Care of Children and Adolescents: A
Guide for Primary Care Clinicians.
Itasca, IL: American Academy of
Pediatrics; 2018:815
154. Cheng TL, Emmanuel MA, Levy DJ,
Jenkins RR. Child health disparities:
what can a clinician do? Pediatrics.
2015;136(5):961–968
155. Stein F, Remley K, Laraque-Arena D,
Pursley DM. New resources and
strategies to advance the AAP’s values
of diversity, inclusion, and health equity.
Pediatrics. 2018;141(4):e20180177
156. American Academy of Pediatrics,
Committee on Child Health Financing.
Scope of health care beneﬁts for
children from birth through age 26.
Pediatrics. 2012;129(1):185–189
PEDIATRICS Volume 144, number 4, October 2019
25
Downloaded from publications.​aap.​org/​pediatrics/​article-pdf/​144/​4/​e20192528/​1443490/​peds_20192528.​pdf
by guest
[/PAGE 25]
